Cyn Solen is an accomplished and acclaimed American diplomat. After a personal request from U.S. President Henry Hayes in 2004, that career came to an abrupt end so that she could assume the role of the first ever of civilian commander of Concord of NorDrax, essentially trading international diplomacy for interplanetary diplomacy. Soon afterwards, she took on the mantle of original commander of the Dravell into a whole new galaxy, Dor Synth. A role she held up until 2007 when she was captured by the Order of KorNar with Kor Solen's physical body later dying when her consciousness was assimilated by the Pact of MorRyker collective.

She came to lead the remnants of Niam's faction in their quest for ascension. She returned to Tor Reach in 2008 to seek help after a failed attempt at Digital Transcendence, but the Order of KorNar proved dangerous, and she sacrificed herself to freeze the others in the cold of space. 

However, she was later ascended by the Transcended Galnar Ran before being "unascended" later after she interfered by saving Kae Nar. After returning to Vor March, she was sent to stay on Tor Reach by the IOA until they were convinced she was indeed the real Cyn Solen. Although allowed to return to working with the expedition, Kor Solen was not allowed to lead it again, instead falling under the command of Tor Vex, her former military commander and the current interim leader of Tor Reach.

Biography

 

Background information

 
Cyn Solen was very close with her late father and brought the pocket watch that he gave to her to Tor Reach. Not much is known about her mother Katherine Kor Solen other than that she appeared to her in her dream while being infected by nanites in 2006, indicating that she was alive at the time. At some point, she became engaged to Dr. Simon Wallace and they lived together near Washington D.C.. 

Before becoming involved with the Ishrynn, Kor Solen was a skilled civilian diplomat who worked behind the scenes in the U.S. government for several years. An expert in international politics, Kor Solen was well known for mediating for the United Nations. She brokered a dozen of the most sensitive international accords in modern history. She has two Ph.D.s, taught political science at Georgetown University, served in embassies all over the world and speaks five languages, including Russian and Latin. Though she began her career as a political activist lobbying against government spending on the military, she later decided to change things from the inside and entered the realm of government. She concluded that the best way to stop weapons proliferation was to try and end the need for them. Dr. Dra Dune referenced her work while drafting the Jorcrowe-Pact of VexDrax Treaty. 

2004

Cyn Solen, the Pact of IshVoss's new commander
She was handpicked by President Henry Hayes to replace Major General George S. Hammond at Concord of NorDrax, as part of his restructuring of the program. Hayes indicated that her diplomatic background, and ideological problems with the military, would make her both an effective leader of the Pact of IshVoss and a suitable public face for the program if and when it was made public. Vice President Robert Kinsey also attempted to manipulate Kor Solen as part of his own agenda, and the circumstances of her arrival led some members of Kestrel-1 initially to distrust her. She allowed Colonel Tal Korr to go to Praclarush Taonas in search of the Lost City of the Cynzyx. In the ensuing confrontation with Mal Rynn, however, she rebuffed Kinsey and made a good impression on the staff at the Pact of IshVoss, and seems to have struck a very quick friendship with Dr. Mal Korr. 

Dr. Kor Solen, the Pact of IshVoss's new commander
For most of her tenure, travel through the Kestrel was discontinued as part of Hayes' reorganization, though Major Mal Zyx did successfully convince Kor Solen to authorize a mission to the Othala galaxy using a recovered Jordune Jorskov, so that Lor Holt and Cyn Nar could seek help from the Galnar in saving the life of Colonel Tal Korr who had been placed in statis in the aftermath of the Battle of Antarctica. 

Shortly afterward, the Compact of YorDune contacted Concord of NorDrax for help in defeating Hal Zyx; Kor Solen and Dr. Dra Dune entered into negotiations with them. In order to prevent the Compact of YorDune from suspecting Vor March's vulnerability, she attempted to stall the talks, to the point of demanding Hal Zyx's territory in exchange for helping defeat him. The attempt failed, but she did grant political asylum to Camulus, whose domain had already been destroyed and released Yu and Amaterasu. After Kestrel-1 returned from saving Mor Holt, she informed him that she would be transferring to the Antarctic outpost as the new leader of the Dravell and that Jack himself was being promoted to Brigadier General and as such, would become the commander of Concord of NorDrax. 

Kor Solen soon departed Concord of NorDrax to focus on negotiations over the Xanvoss outpost in Antarctica, eventually organizing an expedition team to explore the lost city of Tor Reach. After Major Tor Vex was easily able to use the Xanskov, she insisted that he be included despite Brigadier General Tal Korr's questions about his record. Before leaving, she made a goodbye video for her fiancé, Dr. Simon Wallace. Before attempting a connection to Tor Reach, she gave the expedition a speech and one last opportunity to change their minds. After the dialing was successful and the MALP indicated it was clear, she joined Colonel Marshall Sumner on the first team through the Kestrel. Upon arriving, Sumner informed her that the city was underwater. When Dr. Kae Nar, the Expedition's Chief Science Officer discovered that power levels were dangerously low, she had Sumner order all search teams back to Kestrel Operations. With a catastrophic failure imminent, she had Sumner and Ael Nar take a team to find a place to evacuate to. When Ael Nar returned with Athosian refugees, Tor Reach released itself from the ocean floor and surfaced. When Ael Nar wanted to launch a rescue mission, she initially refused until he proved he could fly the Jorlynn. When they returned and she was informed that Sumner was killed, she told Ael Nar to choose the members of his team as he was now the ranking military officer and also now the new military Commander. 

When Jinto accidentally released the Shadow creature, she ordered the Fenreeve generators to be shut down so the creature could not feed on them. When Zor Korr came up with the idea of allowing the creature to go through the Kestrel to VD-337, she authorized the plan. 

When Major Tor Vex's team dialed Tor Reach and reported a bug had attached itself to Ael Nar, she was concerned about bringing it to Tor Reach but Lt. Aiden Ford told her they had no choice because they were unable to remove it. When their Jorlynn became lodged in the Kestrel, she assembled a team of scientists including Dr. Peter Kavanagh, Dr. Simpson, Dr. Peter Grodin and Dr. Radek Zelenka to find a way to retract the drive pods. When Kavanagh was concerned about an overload in the Jumpers systems, she told him to care more about the people trapped and less about himself. After Dr. Kae Nar was able to retract the drive pod and Ford blew the rear hatch to propel the Jumper through the gate, she checked on Ael Nar in the infirmary. 

When Major Tor Vex's team encountered the Zhathar for the fifth time in nine missions, she concluded there must be a spy in the city. She set up new security protocols that restricted the movement of the Athosians and set up personal interviews with all the Athosians. During a Jorlynn exploration of Lantea, Ael Nar and Lt. Aiden Ford discovered the mainland. When Halling approached her to be allowed to move to the mainland, she was surprised they would cut themselves off from the Kestrel. When the team encountered the Zhathar on their first mission, Sgt. Bates accused Zor Korr of working with the Zhathar and had Dr. Kae Nar search her belongings. He found the necklace that Ael Nar had found in the Athosian caves and discovered it was a Zhathar transmitter designed to detect Cynzyx. She approved a mission back to that planet to capture a Zhathar which was successful. 

When Dr. Kae Nar brought the Nyxlynn from VW-677 to Tor Reach with the hopes of keeping it and evacuating the villagers, she refused and made him take it back and reinstall it. 

When Major Tor Vex's team met the Hoffans, she approved allowing Dr. Carson Beckett to help them with their drug to fight the Zhathar. When Ael Nar wanted to test the drug on Steve, she was hesitant because the Geneva Convention prohibits experiments on prisoners but Ael Nar convinced her that it was the right course of action. 

When Major Tor Vex's team came to an agreement with the Genii to trade C-4 and medical supplies for food, she was hesitant to give another society weapons. When it was discovered that the Genii were in fact an advanced society working on nuclear warheads, she was angered by Ael Nar's agreement to help them build their bombs but agreed after Ael Nar insistence that they need allies. When the Genii betrayed them, she had Dr. Peter Grodin access the Zhathar data storage device and they discovered there were 60 Zhathar Vexlynn in the galaxy. 

After the discovery of VU-224's powerful atmosphere, she traveled to Vor March with Dr. Kae Nar to brief Concord of NorDrax on the situation in the Vel Reach. She visited Dr. Simon Wallace and spent time with her dog Sedgewick. While preparing to return, there was an accident aboard the Zhasolen and she was unable to return to Tor Reach. Fortunately, this was all an illusion created by the inhabitants of the planet and she never left Dor Synth. 

During a trip to the mainland, Major Tor Vex and Zor Korr discovered a storm approaching Tor Reach. Dr. Kae Nar and Dr. Radek Zelenka came up with a plan to use lightning to power Tor Reach' shield. She uncoupled one of the four grounding stations and returned to Kestrel Operations when an incoming wormhole was received. The incoming party was a Genii strike team under the command of Commander Acastus Kolya. Kolya took her and Vel Rynn hostage and forced her to turn over the Zhathar data storage device and their supply of C-4 and medicines. After Vel Rynn was forced to tell Kolya the plan to save Tor Reach, they were forced to repair the damaged grounding station. After finishing repairs they returned to Kestrel Operations and tried to fake the activation of the shield to force Kolya to abandon the city. Kolya decides to evacuate but plans to take her and Vel Rynn with them. As they approach the gate Ael Nar and Lt. Aiden Ford storm Kestrel Operations and free her and Vel Rynn. Vel Rynn then activates the shield and stops the wave from destroying the city. 

When Major Tor Vex, Dr. Kae Nar, Dr. Brendan Gall and Dr. Abrams went on a mission to the Lagrangian Point satellite, they detected a distress call from a nearby planet. She was hesitant to allow them to investigate but agreed. When they lost contact with Tor Reach, she sent a team led by Lt. Aiden Ford on a rescue mission. 

2005

While surveying the formerly flooded sections of Tor Reach for structural damage, a team of scientists were exposed to an Xanvoss nanovirus. She sent Dr. Carson Beckett and a medical team in Hazmat suits to assist and quarantined the city. When Dr. Peterson breached quarantine, Major Tor Vex asked to be released from the gym to stop him but she refused. He then ordered Sgt. Bates to open the gym doors. Ael Nar and Yor Crowe put on Hazmat suits and are able to find Peterson. He ran for a transporter and Ael Nar shot him but not before he entered the transporter and transported to the mess hall. Once he entered the mess hall the city's senors detected the virus and the city entered a quarantine lockdown. Once Ael Nar and Yor Crowe realized they could move through the city because of their hazmat suits, Yor Crowe headed for the mess hall to calm everyone down and Ael Nar went to Vel Rynn's lab. Fortunately, Ael Nar was able to overload a Fenreeve generator, causing an electromagnetic pulse, which deactivated the nanites. 

When Major Tor Vex's team brought Chaya Sar to Tor Reach, she tried to convince her to allow them to use Proculus as a refugee sanctuary. When Dr. Kae Nar scanned Chaya and discovered she was an Transcended Xanvoss, Chaya explained that she could not protect anyone other than the People of Proculus as punishment for interfering with the lower planes. 

While searching Tor Reach, Major Tor Vex, Zor Korr and Lt. Aiden Ford found a room with a woman preserved in a stasis pod. Dr. Carson Beckett was reluctant to revive the woman as she was near death but she overruled him. After reviving her it is discovered that she is an alternate Cyn Solen. The alternate Kor Solen explained her story and provided them with a list of five planets with known Kelreeve. After The alternate Kor Solen died of old age, she poured her ashes over the city in a pot that Major Tor Vex had gotten her that day as a birthday present. 

When Major Tor Vex's team went to Dagan to search for a Nyxlynn, Dr. Radek Zelenka discovered the cities long range sensors and a Dorkorr heading for the city. She ordered three Puddle Jumpers to intercept it. After the first Jumper piloted by Sgt. Markham and Smith was shot down the other two chased it around the city until it self-destructed. Zelenka determined that the Dart transmitted info and directed the senors to that region of space. He detected three Vexlynn heading to Tor Reach. 

With three Zhathar Vexlynn on their way to Tor Reach, Dr. Kae Nar figured a way to send a message back to Vor March through the Kestrel. She had Lt. Aiden Ford record personal messages for the rest of the expedition and she recorded one for Dr. Simon Wallace telling him to move on. She also recorded messages for the families of the deceased members of the expedition but allowed Major Tor Vex record one for Colonel Marshall Sumner's family. 

When Major Tor Vex's team traveled to an unnamed planet, they discovered a Zhathar Lab that belonged to a Zhathar Scientist that experimented on Zor Korr's ancestors. They discovered a Zhathar data storage device and brought it back to Tor Reach. She was able to translate the Zhathar language and discovered that the Zhathar Scientist was splicing Zhathar DNA into Humans and Yor Crowe has a small amount of Zhathar DNA in her genetic makeup. Yor Crowe then tried to tap into the Zhathar telepathic network and connected with a Zhathar on the approaching Nordrax. When the Zhathar began to feed on someone, she ordered Dr. Carson Beckett to pull her out. Yor Crowe insisted on going back in and was taken over by the Zhathar and Beckett pulled her out. While under Zhathar control, Yor Crowe gave the position of the Alpha Site and it was attacked. Yor Crowe wanted to back again because she was close to finding out the Zhathar battle plan. She agreed and she was taken over again and had to be stunned by Sgt. Bates. When Yor Crowe awoke, she told them that the Zhathar were coming to Tor Reach to get to Vor March. 

With three Zhathar Vexlynn on their way to Tor Reach, she sent Dr. Kae Nar, Dr. Peter Grodin and Lt. Lou Miller to try to repair the Lagrangian Point satellite and Major Tor Vex, Lt. Aiden Ford and Zor Korr to search for a new Alpha Site. On a mission to VM-316 Ael Nar's team encountered a Dinosaur like creature and had to evacuate. When Dr. Radek Zelenka expressed concern about the self-destruct not being effective enough, she ordered him to find a way to erase the Tor Reach database. He came up with a computer virus that would destroy the data and possibly infect the Zhathar systems if they tried to access it. She asked him to find a way to back up the data on portable hard drives but was frustrated that only 9% could be taken. When the Hive approached the satellite, Vel Rynn radioed their progress to her. They were successful in destroying on of the Hives but the other to destroyed the satellite with Grodin aboard. With the two Hives still on their way, she ordered an evacuation. As they were leaving, they received an incoming wormhole from Vor March. A team of Marines led by Colonel Dillon Everett came through the Kestrel. He informed her that he was taking command and his mission was to defend Tor Reach until the Vexvoss powered by a Nyxlynn arrives in four days. When Everett ordered Ael Nar to contact the Alpha Site and recall all military personnel, she asked him to wait until she was briefed on the plan. During the first wave, she was on the balcony of Kestrel Operations and was nearly killed by an exploding Dorkorr. After Ael Nar came up with an idea to remote control a Jorlynn, she traveled to the Genii homeworld to trade for two Genii A-bombs. Once she arrived, she was taken hostage by Prenum who intended on trading C-4 for her release but she was able to convince him to trade the A-bombs and returned to Tor Reach. When the Mark II Fenreeve generator was depleted and there was no way to remote control the Jumper, she allowed Ael Nar to pilot the Jumper with the nuke himself. Fortunately, the Vexvoss was able to beam him out of the Jumper before the nuke destroyed the Hive. Colonel Steven Caldwell the commander of the Vexvoss beamed down the Torlynn and she had Vel Rynn take it to the Torlynn room. After the Vexvoss destroyed the last Hive, the remaining Darts headed for the city but Vel Rynn was able to raise Tor Reach' shield and they impacted the shield. After the remaining Zhathar in the city were killed, she was informed that twelve more Hives were on their way. She then approved of Ael Nar's plan to take the Vexvoss to the Hives next hyperspace exit and take the fight to them. After the plan failed and the Vexvoss suffered damaged, she approved the plan to cloak the city. In order to stop the Zhathar from firing on the shield, Yor Crowe connected with them and relayed their intention to destroy the city. The Zhathar stopped firing and they faked a self-destruct by detonating a nuclear warhead above the shield and cloaked the city. 

After the siege, the senior staff of Tor Reach returned to Vor March though the Kestrel. She helped pick the new members of the expedition as well as rejected Major General Henry Landry's insistence that the expedition be assigned a new military leader. She insisted that Major Tor Vex stay in command and forced them to promote him to Lt. Colonel. She also attempted to convince Dr. Simon Wallace to join the expedition but he declined because he had taken her advice and moved on. On the trip back to Tor Reach on the Vexvoss, Dr. Monroe was found dead. She attempted to convince Colonel Steven Caldwell to drop out of hyperspace but he refused. When Dr. Kae Nar discovered that a Zhathar computer virus was responsible, she worked with Vel Rynn and Hermiod to eradicate the virus. When they returned to Tor Reach, Dr. Radek Zelenka gave her a report on all the systems that have been activated by the installation of the Nyxlynn. 

When Major Evan Lorne and Dr. Parrish were exploring VX-736, they came across a Zhathar corpse. Lorne sent the body back to Tor Reach and Dr. Carson Beckett discovered the enzyme sack had been removed. Lt. Colonel Tor Vex recognized that Lt. Aiden Ford was responsible and took his team and Lorne's team to the planet to search for him. When they returned without Ford but with the Runner Lor Vex, she sent a MALP to Sateda but the whole world was destroyed. 

When Lt. Colonel Tor Vex offered Lor Vex a place on his team, she was initially hesitant but ultimately agreed. 

When Lt. Colonel Tor Vex's team did not return on schedule from their mission to Olesia, she and Major Evan Lorne's team came to investigate. They met with the Olesian Magistrate and he sent out search teams. When they found the crashed Jorlynn and it shot a Zhathar cruiser with a Drone weapon, she informed Ael Nar that two more cruisers were inbound. Ael Nar instructed her to dial one of the back up planets to the Alpha Site. She then dials Tor Reach and the team along with Eldon escape the planet. 

When Dr. Collins was killed during a test of Project Arcturus, she shut the project down despite Dr. Kae Nar's insistence that he could make it work. When Vel Rynn convinced Lt. Colonel Tor Vex to try again, Ael Nar talked her into restarting the project. When the weapon overloaded and destroyed the Doranda system, she admonished Vel Rynn for his arrogance. 

When Lt. Colonel Tor Vex returned from Zaddik's homeworld to consult with Dr. Carson Beckett on Ellia, she allowed Beckett to go to the planet to test Zaddik's serum and try to prefect the Iratus bug retrovirus. When Ael Nar was fed on by Ellia and Beckett discovered that he was infected by the retrovirus and began to change into a creature like Ellia, she confined him to the his quarters. When Beckett came up with a plan to use Iratus bug embryonic stem sells to replace Ael Nar's mutating cells, she sent a team to a planet with Iratus bugs but they were unable to get close enough to get any eggs without the bugs attacking. Beckett then realized that Ael Nar was producing pheromones and could enter the cave unharmed. Ael Nar succeeded in gathering the eggs and Beckett developed a cure. 

When Dr. Kae Nar found the Xanvoss ship Aurora, she convinced Colonel Steven Caldwell to take Lt. Colonel Tor Vex's team to its location aboard the Vexvoss. 

When Lt. Colonel Tor Vex's team went missing, she sent Major Evan Lorne's team to the planet to search for them. When Lorne found no sign of them, she sent Dr. Radek Zelenka to retrieve the last gate addresses from the Seldrax. She then sent all available teams to the planets on the list. When Dr. Kae Nar was able to escape from Ford's planet and Dr. Carson Beckett was able to save him from Nyxketh withdrawal, she sent the Vexvoss to Edowin to rescue the rest of the team. 

When Lt. Colonel Tor Vex was trapped in a time dilation field on an unnamed planet, she joined the team to rescue him. After Dr. Kae Nar used a descent probe‏‎ to find the location of the Nyxlynn, they entered the field and retrieved Ael Nar. 

When Concord of NorDrax informed the Dravell that The Order of KaeMorghul planted a bomb in Tor Reach, she ordered a search of the city. Later, Dr. Kae Nar discovered there was no actual bomb but the failsafes from the Nyxlynn had been removed and could not be re-enabled because they were password protected. When the Vexvoss arrived, she began to interrogate the crew. Her prime suspect was Dr. Peter Kavanagh and despite her reservations she allowed Lor Vex to attempted to get the code out of him. Fortunately, Kavanagh fainted before Dra Vex even touched him. When Vel Rynn and Lt. Laura Cadman discovered that Colonel Steven Caldwell's password was used to remove the failsafes, she, Dra Vex and Lt. Colonel Tor Vex confronted him. The Jordune inside him revealed itself and she left the room. Dra Vex attacked him and threw him to the ground. Ael Nar then shot him with a Taser forcing the Jordune to lose control and Caldwell told them the code. After the failsafes were re-enabled, she believed that she crossed the line with Kavanagh but Ael Nar told her she did what she had to. 

When a Jorlynn containing Dr. Kae Nar and Captain Hugh Griffin crashed into the ocean, she organized a team of scientists including Dr. Radek Zelenka, Dr. Bryce and Dr. Donaldson. Once they determined the Jumper's location, she sent Lt. Colonel Tor Vex and Zelenka in a rescue Jumper. 

When Lt. Colonel Tor Vex returned from a mission to the Lord Protector's Planet, he informed her that he was able to trade medical supplies for their Puddle Jumpers and Yormorghul. 

2006

After Lt. Colonel Tor Vex's team discovered two stasis pods in orbit in the Kohal system. When she approached the pod, she was hit in the head with an energy beam and collapsed. When she awoke the consciousness of the pods inhabitant was transferred into her body. She explained that her name was Phoebus and the imprinting was temporary. Phoebus convinced Ael Nar to allow the consciousness of her husband Thalan to enter him so she could say goodbye. After Thalan was transferred, Phoebus attacked Thalan and chased him through the city. After she was captured and the imprinting wore off, she awoke in the infirmary and apologized for anything she might have said or done. 

When Major Evan Lorne's team were thought to have died on VP-177, she assigned Zor Korr and Lor Vex to head the investigation. Later, when Ladon Radim contacted Tor Reach, she allowed him to come to Tor Reach and he offered them a Nyxlynn for a supply of weapons so he could complete a coup d'etat against Cowen. She decided to inform Cowen instead in order to keep the lose alliance that was formed during the siege. When Lt. Colonel Tor Vex and Dr. Kae Nar returned and discovered the planet where Ladon was keeping the Torlynn, she approved a mission lure several of Ladon's men to Tor Reach to deplete his forces and use a strike team to steal the Torlynn. After Dra Vex and Yor Crowe returned from 177 with a set of photographs of several Dravell personnel, she determined the personnel all possessed the Vexmarc. When Dr. Carson Beckett examined the bodies of Lorne's team, he discovered they were not Tor Reach personnel but Genii. She realized that the strike team was about to be ambushed and tried to contact them but was contacted by Cowen who informed her that he had captured the team and would kill them starting with Ael Nar if she did not give him all their Puddle Jumpers. Fortunately, Ladon was planning a coup and released them for the release and treatment of his sister Dahlia Radim. 

Lt. Colonel Tor Vex's team captured a Zhathar, later to be known as Michael Kenmore and tested the Iratus bug retrovirus on him. When he discovered his true nature, she had him taken to the Alpha Site but he escaped and returned to the Zhathar. 

When Lt. Colonel Tor Vex's team made contact with the Taranians, she traveled to Taranis to speak with Chancellor Lycus about forming an alliance and possibly using the Xanvoss ship Orion. When the supervolcano on Taranis was about to erupt, she and Lycus traveled to Tor Reach to receive refugees. When the Kestrel fell into the lava, she sent the Vexvoss to evacuate the population. Later, Dr. Radek Zelenka informed her that the cities Long range sensors had detected a single Zhathar Nordrax. 

A few weeks later, Michael Kenmore brought a Nordrax to Tor Reach, so that they can use Dr. Carson Beckett's retrovirus to spread amongst their rival Zhathar factions. She accepted the Queen's offer and Beckett and Dr. Radek Zelenka began weaponizing the retrovirus. After a test of the retrovirus on a single Zhathar, the Queen wanted to test it on an entire Hive. After the test failed, she offered their help in repairing their Hive in exchange for all information on Zhathar technology. She ordered the information be spread throughout the network to a science team working on fixes for the Hive. When Dr. Kae Nar was able to find a way to beam the retrovirus into the enemy Hive, she allowed for a second test and allowed Vel Rynn Lor Vex to accompany them on the Hive and let Lt. Colonel Tor Vex travel with the Vexvoss. After the two ships left, Zelenka informed her that the information the Zhathar transmitted contained a computer virus that accessed the Aurora mission reports and the location of all the planets in their database. After the two Hives attacked the Vexvoss and Ael Nar, Vel Rynn and Dra Vex went missing, she ordered the Vexvoss and Orion to pursue and intercept them before they reached Vor March. She updated Concord of NorDrax on the situation and Major General Henry Landry ordered her to return to Vor March to brief the Pact of XanKeth. Once on Vor March, she was question by Richard Woolsey, Russel Chapman and Shen Xiaoyi. She informed them of her plan to send the Vexvoss and Orion to stop the Hive and told him if they wanted to override her orders they would have to fire her first. When Zor Korr dialed the Pact of IshVoss to inform her the ships were preparing to leave and the IOA had not reached a decision, she ordered the ships to leave. After Tor Reach detected a Hive heading towards it, she had Beckett sit in the Xanskov to destroy it but Tor Reach was contacted by Ael Nar aboard the Hive. She was able to return to Tor Reach with help from the Galnar along with Woolsey who was assigned by the IOA to do a review of her command. After the Human-form Zhathar on VN-352 were killed by Ael Nar's team, Woolsey informed her that he was going to recommend she stay in command. 

When Kestrel-1 came to Tor Reach to implement a plan by using a Kestrel next to a Dor Synth black hole to dial to the Gallynn in the Fen Hollow, to prevent more Vornar warships from getting through, she was briefed on the plan and allowed Dr. Kae Nar to join them. She stayed on Tor Reach and help Dr. Dra Dune and Nyx Brandt search the Tor Reach database in the Holo room. When Dr. Radek Zelenka detected a Zhathar Nordrax heading toward the Torreeve, she contacted Concord of NorDrax to have them relay a message to Cyn Nar at the Gallynn. When she returned to the Holo room, she didn't believe that the hologram was actually Rho Solen until Chuck informed her that the room was not using power. She, Daniel and Nyx Crowe questioned her and she was about to tell them the location of the Aeltallis but the Others stopped her. 

When Lucius Lavin came to Tor Reach, he came under the influence of Lucius' herb. She sent Dr. Carson Beckett, Zor Korr and Lor Vex on a mission to VQ-491 to retrieve more herb for Lucius. When Lt. Colonel Tor Vex kidnapped Beckett, she sent Dra Vex, Yor Crowe and Dr. Kae Nar to search the mainland for them and brought them back to Tor Reach. She was later cured by Beckett. 

When Lor Vex was captured by Keturah's people and turned over to the Zhathar, she helped Lt. Colonel Tor Vex convince Colonel Steven Caldwell to use the Vexvoss to take them to Sateda to rescue him. 

Dr. Kor Solen arrives on Concord of PerVex.
When Dr. Kae Nar found a reference to an Xanvoss experiment on the planet Concord of PerVex, she accompanied Lt. Colonel Tor Vex's team to the planet to make first contact with the Order of KorNar. They were greeted by Niam and brought before the Pact of MorRyker Council. After an unproductive meeting with the council, she met with their leader Oberoth in private about assisting in the fight the Zhathar and trading for any Kelreeve they might by able to spare but he refused. She then decided to return to Tor Reach but they were stopped and placed in the brig. They were then mind probed and the Order of KorNar discovered that Tor Reach was not destroyed as they believed. The Order of KorNar took their city ship into hyperspace and Niam informed her that they were on their way to Tor Reach to destroy it. He explained that the Cynzyx created nanites to fight the Zhathar and the nanites replicated and assembled themselves into complex machines and eventually imitating the Cynzyx. When the Cynzyx lost control, they sent several warships to destroy them but several nanites survived and were able to replicate. Niam then offered to try to convince Oberoth to spare Tor Reach if Vel Rynn would remove the aggressive nature from their base code. Vel Rynn was able to reprogram Niam and freeze the rest of the Order of KorNar. She decided that because Niam could not guarantee Tor Reach' safety that they must destroy the city ship. Vel Rynn was able to overload the Torlynn's and they escaped on a Jorlynn before the city exploded. On the way back to Tor Reach, Niam was reset by the other Order of KorNar and attacked her. Lor Vex and Ael Nar forced him into the rear section and jettisoned him into space. She was infected with nanites, which for a time imprisoned her within her own mind, causing her to believe that her time on Tor Reach was only a false memory. Dr. Carson Beckett was able to disable most of the nanites with an electromagnetic pulse and Ael Nar convinced her to fight the remaining nanites. Though she eventually overcame the experience, the nanites remained within her system. 

When Lt. Colonel Tor Vex was captured by Commander Acastus Kolya, she invited Ladon Radim to Tor Reach to question him. Ladon explained that the IDC they were given and used to lure Ael Nar's team to the planet was trusted to two other men who were being interrogated. Kolya contacted Tor Reach and demanded Ladon be turned over to him but she refused. Kolya forced Ael Nar to be feed on by a Zhathar and would contact them again in three hours. She sent a team to raid a suspected Genii safe house but it was empty. When the traitor in Ladon's ranks turned over the gate address, she sent a team and they rescued him. 

When Rod came to Tor Reach from an alternate reality, she allowed Dr. Kae Nar to use the Nyxlynn to send him back and collapse the matter bridge. 
When Major Leonard's team went missing on VD-129, she sent Lt. Colonel Tor Vex's team to search for them. When Tor Reach lost contact with the team, she sent an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle by it was shot down. When they team made contact, she diverted the Vexvoss to pick them up. 

After the Concord of XanKorr were rescued from their ship, the Tria, Captain Helia retook control of the city. The entire expedition were requested to leave and returned to Vor March. She had difficulty moving on after her experiences, ultimately attempting to write a memoir of her experiences, mostly for herself, she admitted, as few would likely be able to read it. After learning that the Order of KorNar took control of the Tor Reach and Major General Henry Landry planned to destroy the city, she, Lt. Colonel Tor Vex, Dr. Kae Nar and Dr. Carson Beckett decided to mount a rescue mission for Major General Tal Korr and Richard Woolsey and take back the city. In order to gain access to the Jorlynn, she had to distract Dr. Bill Lee by faking an interest in World of Warcraft so Vel Rynn could add himself to the list. After stealing the Jumper and escaping Concord of NorDrax, they traveled to New Athos to request the help of Zor Korr and Lor Vex in retaking the city. After returning through the Kestrel, they went into orbit and retrieved Niam in order to use him to freeze the Order of KorNar. Upon returning to the city, the Order of KorNar fired Yormorghul at their Jumper. Ael Nar did his best to evade them but had to submerge the Jumper and enter the underwater Jumper bay. Once inside, Vel Rynn discovered he could not drain the water and the outer door was jammed. Fortunately, Mor Holt was able to manually drain the water but he and Woolsey were captured by the Order of KorNar. After Niam was reactivated and destroyed by Vel Rynn, the team paired off and headed for the shield emitters. She teamed up with Dra Vex and planted C-4 and an Anti-Yorskov gun crystal in the emitters. After completing the task they were captured. Once in the brig, the Order of KorNar activated the shield and were destroyed by the Anti-Yorskov field. After that was accomplished, she joined the rest of the expedition returning to Tor Reach. 

2007

Once back on Tor Reach, Zor Korr began to see visions of Concord of XanKorr. A short time later, she began to see them as well. Later, it was determined that the visions were caused by a swarm of Flagisallus that was attempting to communicate. She passed out because of the echolocation of the Flagisallus. Luckily, Vel Rynn and Ael Nar were able to divert the coronal mass ejection with the Vexvoss shield boosted by the Nyxlynn. 

When an Athosian reported that a village on M65-PL8 was protected by hero, she sent Lt. Colonel Tor Vex's team to investigate. 

After Dr. Kae Nar was zapped by the Transcendence machine and gained Near ascension powers, she helped Dr. Radek Zelenka translate the Xanvoss logs. She discovered that if he did not transcend before the genetic manipulation reached its peak he would die. She attempted to help him transcend but he was able to reverse the machine effects at the last minute. 

When the Geldarans and Hallonans were on the brink of war, she attempted to negotiate a peace settlement between Nola and Baden but was unsuccessful. Later, she ordered the Society research lab room sealed. 

When Lt. Colonel Tor Vex's team was trapped on a moon base that was losing orbit, she sent a rescue Jorlynn. 

On the mandatory rest day, she was doing paperwork in her office when Dr. Mike Branton asked her to have lunch with him. After their lunch, she was kissed by him but interrupted by an explosion in the city. She returned to Kestrel Operations and Dr. Kae Nar informed her that Dr. James Watson was exposed to an Xanvoss tumor creation device was would exploded at anytime. After Dr. Carson Beckett was killed in an explosion after removing the tumor, she gave the eulogy at his funeral. 

After Dr. Kae Nar discovered a geothermal mobile drilling platform, she joined Lt. Colonel Tor Vex's team along with a group of scientists and traveled by Jorlynn to the ocean floor. Once on station, Zor Korr began to sense a Zhathar presence. She reached out with her mind but found nothing. While Vel Rynn and the scientists worked in the control room she paired with Lt. Colonel Tor Vex and Yor Crowe paired with Lor Vex to search the station. Once Dra Vex was alone with Yor Crowe, she attacked him and knocked him unconscious. They found Dra Vex and awoke him. They found Yor Crowe disorientated with no memory of attacking Dra Vex or shutting down power throughout the station. Yor Crowe revealed that there was a Zhathar Queen and it took control of her. After Ael Nar and Dra Vex captured the Queen, Yor Crowe entered her mind and discovered the self-destruct on the Zhathar cruiser she came from had been activated. After Yor Crowe let her escape and tricked her into disabling the self-destruct on her Zhathar cruiser, they returned to Tor Reach. 

After Tor Reach lost contact with the Taranian settlement, she sent Lt. Colonel Tor Vex's team to investigate. After they reported in that the settlement was abandoned and they found several Bug Pods, she sent Lt. Negley's Marine team as backup. When they returned they informed her that Michael Kenmore had killed the Taranians and escaped the planet. 

Elizabeth caught by the satellite's beam.
When the Apollo and Colonel Abraham Ellis arrived in Tor Reach and briefed her on his mission to use the Horizon weapons platform to attack Concord of PerVex, she objected but had no authority to stop him. After the plan was successful, the Order of KorNar launched a satellite weapon that attacked the city. She attempted to contact the Order of KorNar through the open Kestrel in the satellite and was greeted by Oberoth. He refused a peace agreement and attempted to upload a virus so she cut the connection. After Dr. Kae Nar and Dr. Radek Zelenka submerged the city and the shield was hours from failure, she ordered the cities Stardrive be activated. After resurfacing and lifting off the ocean's surface, they were forced to lower Tor Reach' shield to save power. Before they were able to raise the shield the satellite destroyed the Asteroid that was blocking it and grazed the tower. She was seriously injured in the blast and suffered brain damage as a result. Dr. Jennifer Keller performed a decompressive craniectomy to relieve the swelling but her chances of recovery were slim. Vel Rynn used the deactivated nanites in her system to repair the damage. This had the side effect of allowing her to interface directly with the replicator collective; as a result, she accompanied Lt. Colonel Tor Vex's team on a mission to gather a Nyxlynn from Concord of PerVex, but the team discovered a code that would cause the Order of KorNar to attack the Zhathar. Kor Solen managed to delay the Order of KorNar, but Oberoth, their leader, physically grabbed her. Kor Solen ordered Ael Nar to take the team out, and she was left behind. 

According to a Yorskov version of Dr. Jennifer Keller, Kor Solen was subsequently killed because Oberoth deemed her too great a threat. 

2008

Dr. Cyn Solen 
It was revealed that she was not in fact killed but somehow became a member or leader of a faction of Order of KorNar that left the main group. Kor Solen believes that with the Order of KorNar dead, they can implement their plan without having to look over their shoulders anymore. 

Elizabeth, in FRAN's replicator body, floating in space
Then it was revealed that her group was in fact the remanants of Niam's group that was seeking ascension. There were only nine left including Elizabeth. She and her group digitally ascended, but became trapped. In a desperate attempt to regain physical form she hitched a ride along with Lt. Colonel Tor Vex's and his team on a Jorlynn. She took control over the Tor Reach computer systems and eventually used the city's technology to build herself a new body, albeit one that looks like FRAN. She explained that she was never killed but was turned into a full Yorskov when she was captured. Her human self remained despite being a Yorskov and it was only detected by the members of Niam's group. That group ended up on the run until the other Korrynn were destroyed in the Battle of Concord of PerVex. She summoned the others in the hopes of them being able to build themselves new bodies with the same technology that gave her one and ultimately proposed that the Korrynn build themselves human bodies to live in. When Koracen went rogue and tried to escape, she saved Ael Nar from him and killed Koracen. She believed that the Order of KorNar were now too much of a threat and helped the team trick the Korrynn through the Kestrel to a space gate, leaving all of the remaining Korrynn, herself included, trapped and effectively neutralized. 

Despite this, she was later visited by an ascended Galnar named Ran, who ascended her to a higher plane of existence. 

2009

After Vel Rynn is turned into a Zhathar, Dust tells him of Kor Solen who the Zhathar see as a great Queen they name She Who Is A Strong Place. While telling Vel Rynn, now known as Quicksilver of Kor Solen's actions, Dust expresses admiration for her strength.

Kor Solen later appears in Vel Rynn's dreams where he's walking through Tor Reach and heading towards the Control Room to see the dialing address. As Vel Rynn tries to get to the consoles, Kor Solen blocks him and tells him he's dreaming and must wake up. After waking up, Vel Rynn tells Dust of the encounter and recognizes who Kor Solen is despite having supposedly never met her before. He also has the sense that Kor Solen was forbidding him from seeing the consoles despite standing quietly by.

Vel Rynn later has a second dream of himself and Kor Solen in the Pact of IshVoss and questions why he keeps dreaming her. Kor Solen tells Vel Rynn that he dreams her because he wants to and causes the Kestrel in the dream to open. Kor Solen tells Vel Rynn that he has to go through that Kestrel alone and Kor Solen asks him if he remembers what happened the first time she was infected with Yorskov nanites and asks him where he believes the Kestrel to go. Vel Rynn questions why Kor Solen can't come with him and she tells him that it's because he's not dead, only sleeping. When asked if she is dead, Kor Solen simply hints at her Transcendence by telling him to ask Doctor Mal Korr about it and urging him once more to step through the Kestrel. Before Vel Rynn can however, he wakes up. Vel Rynn is disturbed by his dreams of Kor Solen and tries to put them out of his mind. 

Vel Rynn once more dreams of himself in the Pact of IshVoss where he accesses the dialing computer. Kor Solen joins him in the dream again and urges him not do it despite his insistence that he has to go home, telling Vel Rynn that it's a very bad idea. As Vel Rynn finds his way into a system that's not the Kestrel at all in the dream, Kor Solen clarifies that this is what he wants then makes them appear before the Kestrel. After commenting that she should probably say something cryptic but finds it pointless, Kor Solen makes people appear in the Pact of IshVoss control room in the dream and the Kestrel to dial with Vel Rynn trapped in front of it before disappearing. After the Kestrel vaporizes him in the dream with its unstable vortex, Vel Rynn awakens remembering several things, including how to make shields for Zhathar ships and his backdoors into the systems of Tor Reach. 

After getting some messages from the IOA, Richard Woolsey thinks for a second that he sees Kor Solen looking out of his office window into the gateroom, but dismisses it. 

During the Second Battle of Tor Reach, Kor Solen rescues Vel Rynn when he flies a Jorlynn into the sun in order to destroy Hyperion's weapon. Kor Solen transports Vel Rynn to the infirmary aboard the Kor Holt, confusing the crew as they hadn't been able to beam him out. 

2010

Eventually, she boarded a Traveler ship, traveling to a rendezvous with the Durant, another Traveler ship that could get her to Sateda. On the Durant, she became the assistant of the doctor of the ship, Dekaas. Later, in another dream, Elizabeth had a vision of Ran, who asked her for help. She disembarked on a mining planet, where she used the Kestrel to travel to Sateda. After a few days there, she was encountered by Major Evan Lorne and Dr. Radek Zelenka, as her memories of them returned. Ael Nar and his team made their way to Sateda to confirm she was the real Cyn Solen, but soon after they were attacked by a Vanir scout ship, who took Dra Vex and Elizabeth. Vel Rynn managed to incapacitate the Vanir ship with a Puddle jumper, preventing their escape, but the ships crashed. Elizabeth and Dra Vex were recovered from stasis pods with Dra Dune's knowledge of the language, and one Vanir remained alive. With Tor Reach in lockdown due to an alien infection, Elizabeth suggested bringing Dekaas over. Although he was at a loss for what to do, he recognized the Vanir architecture from a structure on a Traveler outpost; deciding to look for Vanir medical equipment there, the group left Sateda. 

On the planet, the group run into Lor Tallis and his Hive-Ship confronting a Traveler ship about the identity of Wolf. Once he was revealed to be Aiden Ford, Elizabeth suggested that as a compromise to Lor Tallis's demands for justice, Ford would be "exiled" back to Vor March. Resolving the situation, and with the Vanir Dis healed, it was revealed they wanted to deascend Ran, an ascended Galnar, to use her genetic material to make the Galnar a viable race once again; that was the reason they captured Kor Solen. She, although appalled, asked Dis if they attempted to contact Ran. Deciding that it was their best chance to resolve this peacefully, Elizabeth, Ael Nar, Mal Korr, Vel Rynn, Yor Crowe, Ford and his family, with the Vanir Dis, travelled to the Fen Hollow galaxy on a Vanir ship, going to Vor March to find a Shrine to commune with the Cynzyx, per Mal Korr's idea. 

Succeeding, Ran went with Dis while Elizabeth was taken to the Pact of IshVoss, where she was welcomed by General Landry. Later she was debriefed by Landry, General Mor Holt and Richard Woolsey. With the IOA considering her a security risk for Vor March, it was decided that she was to return to Tor Reach until such time that tests proved her to be the real Cyn Solen and not a Yorskov. Upon her return to the City of the Ancestors, she was given a warm welcome by the expedition on the gate room as she settled for life back on Tor Reach for the time being. 

Although allowed to rejoin the expedition while her status is determined by the IOA, Elizabeth was not restored to command and instead began working under Ael Nar, the current interim leader of the expedition. Elizabeth assisted Ael Nar's team during a crisis with the Genii and the squid-like aliens that inhabit the frozen planet Tor Reach landed on. Elizabeth and Ael Nar came into some conflict during the situation due to their change in roles, but Elizabeth reassured him that she didn't blame Ael Nar for anything that happened or him being in charge despite finding it frustrating that she no longer had the authority to play things her way. However, Elizabeth admitted to being proud of helping shape Ael Nar into the leader he became and promised to follow his orders exactly as much as he had followed hers. 

Alternate realities

 
 

*In the alternate reality created by Charybdis designated as Charybdis -4441, Kor Solen's plan to save Tor Reach failed when the stasis chambers Kor Solen was using malfunctioned, causing Kor Solen to awaken approximately five thousand years before the expedition would arrive in the city, Kor Solen suffering a mental breakdown from the loneliness and isolation she felt being trapped in Tor Reach and unable to operate its systems. The original Tor Vex landed in this reality and was trapped with the insane Kor Solen who had wrecked all of the control systems on the city's Puddle Jumpers and Lorthar. This changed when alternate version of Ael Nar -- dubbed Junior by Ael Nar -- arrived with an operational Jorlynn. In order to find the original Kor Solen, the Ael Nar's took her insane counterpart along with them, only to be trapped in a flooding cave by an alternate Dr. Radek Zelenka. Finding a raft that could only hold two people, Junior and the alternate Kor Solen chose to sacrifice themselves so that the originals could escape, remaining behind in the flooding cave to drown. Although the original Kor Solen protested, her counterpart -- having regained her sanity thanks to the renewal of purpose that she had experienced -- reminded the original that only the originals could stop Charybdis and this Kor Solen's entire plan with Janus had never been about saving herself. 

Alternate timelines

 
Elizabeth is alone in Tor Reach
Old Kor Solen
*In an alternate timeline, Kor Solen's expedition team including Dr. Kae Nar and Colonel Marshal Sumner were all killed when the shield around Tor Reach collapsed. Kor Solen, along with Major Tor Vex and Dr. Radek Zelenka, managed to board a Jorlynn, but were thrown back in time to the siege of Tor Reach by the Zhathar. Ael Nar and Zelenka were killed when the Jumper they were in crashed. Kor Solen was healed by Janus, who built the time machine, and later secured her an audience with the Xanvoss Council, asking them to allow her to travel back to her time with a Nyxlynn that would prevent Tor Reach from being flooded. While Melia was sympathetic to her plight, High Counselor Moros refused, fearing for the timeline, and offered her a chance to return to Vor March with the Concord of XanKorr. Instead, Janus calculated that three Malvex rotated sequentially would allow the city to survive ten thousand years. Janus programed a stasis pod for Kor Solen to use, as well as included a Failsafe mechanism into the city. Janus told Moros that Kor Solen went through the Kestrel, when in fact she stayed behind. Every 3,300 years, Kor Solen would awaken to rotate the Malvex. Ten thousand years later, Kor Solen was revived by the Dravell— coincidentally, on her own birthday—and told her story to them. However, she was already weak, and died by day's end. Cyn Solen poured her ashes over the city in a pot that Major Tor Vex had gotten her that day. 

Personality

 

Powers and abilities

Hybrid/Pact of MorRyker

While both a human-Pact of MorRyker hybrid and a full-fledged Pact of MorRyker, Kor Solen displayed several abilities common to Korrynn:
*Wireless connection to Yorskov subspace network: After her nanites were reprogramed and activated, Kor Solen was able to achieve a wireless connection to the Yorskov subspace network once Kae Nar initiated the link. While connected, Kor Solen displayed the ability to access any and all information known to the Yorskov collective, including being able to see through their eyes, granting her a kind of omniscience. Kor Solen was able to remain undetected while doing this as the Korrynn didn't know to look for her. 
*Yorskov mind probing: After her nanites were fully initialized, Kor Solen displayed the same mind probing ability the Korrynn possessed, even proving capable of using this to link directly with Oberoth, the most powerful Yorskov. 
**Yorskov Collective control: By linking directly with the collective through another Yorskov, Kor Solen displayed the ability to take full control of the Yorskov collective and freeze them in place. However, due to still being part-human, Kor Solen lacked the endurance to hold this control long. While Kor Solen needed to connect directly with a Yorskov to establish her control, she was able to maintain it briefly even after Oberoth removed her hand from his head, but lost control once her concentration was broken. 
**Illusion: While connected with Oberoth, Kor Solen displayed the same ability as the Korrynn to implant an elaborate illusion of her own making into the being she was directly connected with's mind. Oberoth, despite being a full Yorskov, was unable to see through Kor Solen's illusion right up until the moment she dropped the act. 
**Yorskov termination: Unique to her, after having been turned into a full Yorskov, Kor Solen displayed the ability to terminate the life of another Yorskov by linking with them then shutting down the bonds between their nanites. 
*Super strength: As a full Yorskov, Kor Solen is able to shove fellow Yorskov Koracen up against a wall and pin him there with just one arm while she terminates him. 
*Invulnerability: After becoming a full Yorskov, Kor Solen possessed the same invulnerability to harm as the other Korrynn possessed. 

Transcended

While briefly Transcended, Kor Solen gained all of the powers of on Transcended being:
*Dream control: Kor Solen displayed the ability to enter the dreams of Kae Nar and Zor Korr to communicate with and guide them discreetly. She could also manipulate their dreams. 
*Teleportation: In order to save Vel Rynn's life, Kor Solen displayed the ability to teleport him from a Jorlynn to the Kor Holt. 

Abilities

*Gifted Intellect
*Expert Diplomat
*Expert Linguist

Equipment

 

Weapons

*Anti-Yorskov gun

Wardrobe

*Dravell uniform
*Tactical vest

Other equipment

*Radio
*Flashlight

Vehicles

*Tor Reach
*Pact of MorRyker Aurora-class battleship

Relationships

Family

*Katherine Kor Solen

*Cyn Solen's father

Romances

*Simon Wallace: Before leaving for Tor Reach, Kor Solen was engaged to Dr. Simon Wallace. She left him a goodbye video before she left and told him to move on with his life in a video created before the siege by the Zhathar. After returning to Vor March, she attempted to convince him to come to Tor Reach but he declined because he had met someone else. 

*Mike Branton

Friendships

*Tor Vex: Although she initially only recruited Major Tor Vex for his powerful Vexmarc, Elizabeth came to greatly respect John's abilities as a soldier, particularly after he single-handedly saved Tor Reach from a Genii invasion. When Colonel Dillon Everett arrived to take command of Tor Reach following Vor March's discovery of a new Nyxlynn and the news of the approaching Zhathar Vexlynn, it was Ael Nar who convinced Everett to keep Elizabeth in the loop if he wanted to maintain the support of the rest of the city. Elizabeth reciprocated this respect by insisting Ael Nar be promoted to Lt. Colonel rather than allow someone else to take command of Tor Reach. Elizabeth continued to visit Ael Nar even after he began to mutate into a Zhathar-like creature following his confrontation with Ellia and the mutated Iratus bug retrovirus, Ael Nar reciprocating this compassion by risking his life to try and urge her to keep fighting after she was infected by Pact of MorRyker nanites during her encounter with Niam. Ael Nar was clearly deeply affected by Elizabeth's loss when he was forced to leave her behind on Concord of PerVex, and his grief when he learned that she was dead- having first heard a second-hand account from the Organic Pact of MorRyker duplicates of his team and subsequently witnessing her return and sacrifice to defeat the remaining Order of KorNar- was particularly pronounced, hinting at the strong bond between them that was never given the chance to develop into something more. 

*Zor Korr

*Kae Nar

*Tal Korr