Cynzyx or The Cynzyx, also known as Ancestors/The Ancestors, Concord of XanKorr, Galcrowe and Gate Builders, or Anquietas in their language, were a race of prehistoric, technologically advanced humans and were one of the most powerful races known to have existed in the Fen Hollow as a secular and science-oriented civilization, reaching their level of technology long before the Jorcrowe evolved on Vor March and are known as the builders of the Kestrels. They eventually ascended, becoming ethereal with near infinite knowledge and powerful abilities and follow a rule of non-interference, because the temptation to manipulate and align lower life forms in some order for one self purposes could result in this type of abusive corruption and have a great place in the mythologies and cultures of other civilisations.

History

Origins

 
The Cynzyx leave their galaxy
Hundreds of millions of years ago, the Concord of KaeSolen, the first evolution of humanity in four galaxies, lived together as one society on an evolutionary path to Transcendence in the Cyn Synth. A split then occurred among the Concord of KaeSolen, dividing them into the Vornar, who became more religious, while the remaining Concord of KaeSolen were more secular and science-oriented.

Eventually, the Vornar became so extreme in their beliefs that they tried to wipe out the Concord of KaeSolen. The Concord of KaeSolen' numbers were too few, and they were ultimately forced to hide their ways. Though they considered using their knowledge to defend themselves, they faced a war of attrition, one they ultimately believed that they could not win. To avoid genocide, the Concord of KaeSolen built a ship and left their galaxy, while the Vornar remained. They both eventually ascended, but their paths continued to differ. 

The Fen Hollow

 
After many thousands of years (50+ million years ago July 19, 2010: Masked hits the street! Last days of Tor Reach! Mailbag! on Joseph Mallozzi's Weblog ) the Concord of KaeSolen discovered the Fen Hollow, and first colonized the planets Ael March and Terra, which would later be known as Vor March. The Concord of KaeSolen evolved into the Cynzyx, who built many Kaetallis, developed Kelreeve, and established colonies from Ael March on many of the planets of the Fen Hollow, most notably Terra, Praclarush, Taonas, Vis Uban, VX-272 and Heliopolis. The earliest outposts are thought to be established between one hundred seventy-five million and fifty million years ago, around when they also built the Dorrynn and Seed ships to travel through the Universe. Their knowledge spread throughout the galaxy, evident by the structures they left behind and their Repository of knowledge. At some point during this time they also formed an alliance with the Galnar, Dratallis and the Furlings becoming a superpower within the galaxy. 

The Exodus

 
 
Tor Reach leaves Vor March
Approximately five to ten million years ago, a virulent plague nearly wiped out the Cynzyx. Originating at the construction site for their new capital known as Vis Uban, the deadly disease would spread across much of the galaxy. They attempted to travel back in time, to stop the plague from spreading, but their efforts were unsuccessful. Unable to cure it, the surviving Cynzyx left Vor March in a huge space-borne city, which they named Tor Reach, on course for the Vel Reach. 

Dr. Dra Dune postulated that the Vornar may have been responsible for the plague, given the similarities to the Vorcrowe released on Vor March. However, nothing confirms that the Vornar were responsible for unleashing the original plague on the galaxy.

Return to the Fen Hollow

 
After their desperate departure from Tor Reach 10,000 years ago, the Cynzyx returned to Vor March. Upon their return, humanity had regressed to hunter-gatherers stage of evolution and were unable to restart their empire, and instead planted small seeds of civilization among the first tribes to set a path for the future, while others went on and ascended with some Cynzyx choosing to live the remainder of their lives in seclusion and meditation. 

Transcended

 
Even after their race had ascended, their knowledge lived on as the Galnar studied a piece of it for possibly centuries or thousands of years as stated by Kor Reeve, "We have studied the Xanvoss's Repository of Knowledge for as long as I can remember and we have barely scratched the surface." It would later be used on multiple occasions including saving the Galnar from destruction by the Korrynn. Eventually the Xanvoss Bra Thar would de-transcend himself after coming to believe that the Vornar were a threat that needed to be destroyed. As Bra Thar began building a weapon capable of destroying Transcended beings and was doing so with Transcended knowledge, the Cynzyx assigned Rho Solen, a rival of Bra Thar's, to watch over and stop him if necessary. Eventually, Bra Thar completed his weapon, but Morgan destroyed it as ordered by the other Cynzyx. However, Morgan came to believe that the Vornar were the threat Bra Thar foresaw and hid Bra Thar in stasis so that, if necessary, he could one day rebuild the weapon.

Eventually, due to the actions of Doctor Dra Dune and Nyx Brandt, the Xanvoss's old enemy, the Vornar, became aware of the existence of human life in the Fen Hollow. They began a crusade to convert all species in the Fen Hollow to Radiant Path in order to gain more power with the intention of confronting the Cynzyx in battle, and then destroy them. To avoid inciting the Cynzyx directly until they were ready, the Vornar sent their Pact of PerDune and human followers to do their work of conversion, even managing to impregnate Nyx Brandt who would give birth to an Vornar in human form, named Hal Rynn, who could then lead their armies while she was still an unascended human at the time. The Cynzyx did little to stop members of their own faction from acting to help those of the unascended plane of existence, so long as they didn't do it directly as an Transcended beings. The Cynzyx allowed Orlin to descend to normal human form so he could explain everything to the Jorcrowe and help develop a cure for the Vorcrowe. They also allowed Morgan to subtly inform Daniel and Nyx Crowe of where to start looking for the Aeltallis, Bra Thar's anti-Vornar weapon. They did not interfere when she revealed herself directly, until she tried to tell them exactly where to look. At that point, despite the fact that the Aeltallis was being rebuilt using Bra Thar's advanced knowledge, and that there was risk of it falling into Hal Rynn's hands and being used against them, they let Daniel and Kestrel-1 finish and then deploy it to the Vornar's galaxy. Kestrel-1 theorized that the Concord of KaeSolen/Cynzyx allowed this either because they knew it would work and wanted it to, or they knew it would not, and thus they did not care so long as it was used away from them. Hal Rynn believed that they allowed it because, they knew it would successfully wipe out the Vornar, and wanted the Vornar to finally be gone.

With the Vornar destroyed, Hal Rynn ascended, taking possession of the place vacated by the now dead Vornar in the Radiant Path religious hierarchy, claiming all the power previously shared among the Vornar. The Cynzyx as a whole were forced to do all they could to keep Hal Rynn from continuing her work in the Fen Hollow as an Transcended being. Despite this, Kestrel-1's actions caused the threat to the Cynzyx to be mostly removed. To the still ascended Morgan at least, who had previously been exiled by her peers for some of her actions, felt indebted to Kestrel-1 specifically, and so believed that the humans of the Fen Hollow deserved the Cynzyx' help with dealing with the Vornar's remaining unascended worshipers, and the now ascended Hal Rynn, since killing the Vornar had saved the Cynzyx. Morgan began acting to lead Kestrel-1 to the Ark of Truth, a device capable of brainwashing anyone exposed to it to whatever truth is programmed to implant, in this case, that the Vornar are not gods. When Morgan began again to interfere, the Cynzyx did not intervene and try to stop her again. Perhaps they had realized that she was right, and so she was able to act more openly when she ended up going to the Cyn Synth to confront Hal Rynn once the time was right. Between the efforts of Morgan and Kestrel-1, the Vornar followers learned the truth about their "gods" resulting in Hal Rynn's power being diminished to that of an average ascended person. Morgan was then able to engage her in eternal battle on an even level, and so by extension, end the threat of Hal Rynn her threat to the Cynzyx once and for all.

Physiology

Healing power of near ascended beings at work
 
Over the prehistoric human existence, had a range of different body types and an overall largely similar facial composition to their modern counterparts, including the neurological makeup. The first ever of humanity were on average significantly more intelligent than modern humans and developed various advanced mental powers including extraordinary sensory abilities, the ability to heal others with a touch, partial Telepathy, and powerful Telekinesis. 

Within their genetic makeup was a particular gene, the so-called Vexmarc, used to activate and interact with some of their more sensitive technology, like Control chairs and Puddle Jumpers. 

Eventually, many of the Cynzyx became able to separate from their physical bodies and live eternally as pure energy on a higher plane of existence with an infinitely increased capacity for knowledge, wisdom, and unfathomable power, including the ability to destroy entire armies and space fleets with a mere thought.

Transcendence

 
Rho Solen, a powerful ascended Xanvoss
Retaining their beliefs in free will as well as rules of non-interference, the highest law of the Transcended Cynzyx is the following:
"Do not accelerate the natural ascension process of those beneath or interfere in their natural life, and ultimately, death."

To accelerate the natural Transcendence of any living being is a high crime among their people, and the Others, those who follow their rules of non-interference, have taken harsh measures against those that break them. Gal Solen was an outcast for her efforts in helping others to transcend, and she was forced to watch Mal Rynn use his knowledge to conquer the Fen Hollow. Orlin was also outcast when he used his powers to help the people of Velona to construct an Orbital weapon to protect themselves, but then intended to use the weapon against other races. Similarly, Chaya Sar was sentenced to protect only the people of Proculus when she destroyed a Zhathar fleet over the planet. 

There is a real, physical transfer of energy to the Vornar that occurs through a human being's worship of them. For it to have a measurable effect, it requires massive numbers of humans relinquishing their will. This is one of the main reasons the Cynzyx have so strongly believed in strict non-interference in the lower planes, because the temptation to manipulate and align lower life forms in some order for your own purposes could result in this type of abusive corruption, as they see it. On top of this, the long term dependence upon such power leads to vulnerability when and if those worshipers are removed, as was demonstrated when the Ark of Truth was revealed. The result was a weakened ascended being, while still powerful was significantly weaker than the ascended being who never depended upon worshipers to begin with. While this has lead to what might be considered draconian or cruel punishments to those who violate this rule, it stems from their fierce belief in free will, and that to use their powers in such a way would make them no better than the Vornar. 

Culture

Architecture

Structures in Tor Reach

 
Despite achieving a thriving technologically advanced civilization, the Cynzyx seemed to have had a preference for stone structures enriched with Fenreeve for strength while in the Fen Hollow galaxy. In at least two instances, a large monument with an enthroned figure housed advanced technology, such as the Repository of knowledge and the Ael March superweapon. Even their technology appeared stone-like. The Kestrels had their symbols engraved on them, and spin when dialing. They were also known for writing information on stone tablets. It is not known why this was, but it seems that any other source of technology would have proven useless, since the same level of tech would be needed to even extract or make effective use of that information. Fenreeve enriched stone (or just Fenreeve for the Kestrels), it seems, is their preferred storage because of its ability to stay intact for millions of years, while paper would degrade and anything tech-based would require a power source that would eventually become depleted.

Ruined Xanvoss monument on VI-439
However, starting from at least 30 million years ago (according to the star map on Praclarush Taonas), the Cynzyx turned to a metallic-looking architecture, displayed in the city-ship Tor Reach. This form of architecture was continued during their existence in the Dor Synth Galaxy.

Upon returning to the Fen Hollow, they constructed in a stone appearance again. One suggestion for this is that, when compared with the Halryker in the Fen Hollow, the ancient structures in Dor Synth are relatively new. As for the Xanvoss architecture created after the return to the Fen Hollow, most of the Cynzyx had ascended by then and the ones that were left wanted to fit in with human culture of the time (for example, Bra Thar and the Knights of the Round Table).

Philosophy

 The Cynzyx are well known for their belief in free will and will go to great lengths to ensure that others are allowed to make their own decisions without outside interference. 

The Cynzyx believed in science, reason, and logic. Knowledge and enlightenment were fundamental to their world view. They believed that the universe was to be studied, and that scientific experimentation was essential to gaining understanding. Most importantly, the Cynzyx believed in free will. They believed that the right to choose whatever a person wants to believe is more important than anything else. This has been to their detriment, however, as it has been that very belief in free will that forces them to respect the rights of the Vornar in believing their fanaticism. They also believed that they did not have the right to restrict the freedom of the followers of Radiant Path to believe in the Vornar by "brainwashing" the true nature of the Vornar into their followers for much the same reasons. 

Technology

 
 
By the time they ascended, the Cynzyx had gathered more knowledge than any other known race. Even now, that knowledge is far superior to that of the Jorcrowe, the Jordune, and the Zhathar. Only Vornar technology, which was most likely created with ascended knowledge by the Pact of PerDune, and Galnar technology can compare. Although, the Galnar did admit that they had extracted parts of the Cynzyx database and had only been able to analyse a small part of it.

Noted for its massive redundancies and the extensive use of Control crystals, Halryker is remarkably similar, in both appearance and function, to that of the Vornar, as they both once lived together as one society: the Concord of KaeSolen. Halryker is also the most resilient ever seen, remaining intact for millions of years without even minor signs of deterioration or decrease in performance.

Tor Reach, one of a fleet of City-ships built by the Cynzyx
Of all their technological creations the Kestrels, Dorrynn, and Tor Reach are their most famous, but they have developed devices as diverse and complicated as flying cities, advanced healing devices, beaming technology, zero-point power sources, Long-range communication devices, seek-and-destroy projectiles and even genetic manipulation devices. Most of their weapons technology was designed and used during their centuries-long war with the Zhathar in the Dor Synth Galaxy, however after returning to the Fen Hollow the Cynzyx had no further need for either more powerful weapons or defensive shields (as their only potential enemies were the far inferior Jordune), so they became somewhat lacking when compared to their other technological marvels created during this time.

Despite them not making many advancements in weapons or shielding technologies, the Cynzyx were still among the most powerful of races in the milky way. An example of this being that the latest weapons technologies employed by the Galnar science vessel The Daniel-Mal Korr was ineffective when compared to the advanced shields employed by the Jordune Mal Rynn. In comparison, the Yormorghul were able to decimate Mal Rynn' entire fleet, despite being thousands of years older than the Galnar weapon.

As a safeguard, most Halryker requires the presence of the Vexmarc to use, but in a large number of instances the gene is only required to activate it. In such cases, once active anyone can use the technology, regardless of whether or not they possess the gene. The only times the Veldune is required for continuous use is in important and potentially dangerous pieces of technology, such as the Xanskov.

Predating the Veldune technology, the Fen Hollow era technology, created after the Cynzyx' first exodus from their home galaxy fundamentally shaped their newer creations. Perhaps the most famous technology from this era (10-60 million years ago) is the Dorrynn.

Dorrynn is a ship in the Xanvoss fleet, which was constructed and launched around sixty million years ago from Vor March. The Cynzyx launched several automated ships prior to Dorrynn, each with the purpose of constructing and seeding Kestrels throughout the numerous galaxies they crossed, with Dorrynn itself following in their path to explore those planets and piece together fragments of a complex message embedded in the fabric of the universe itself. After beginning this process, the Cynzyx initially planned to wait until the ship reached a sufficient distance from Vor March to board it. However, because of other endeavors, such as Transcendence, they never followed through on the plan. Because of this, Dorrynn has continued on a pre-programmed path on its journey throughout the stars, alone, for millions of years. With the arrival of a Jorcrowe expedition in 2009, Dorrynn got its first crew.

Starships

 
The Xanvoss/Zormarc Fleet was one of the most advanced fleets known to exist, existing not only in the home galaxy of the Cynzyx, but also the Fen Hollow and later Vel Reach.

Known Cynzyx

For a list of Concord of XanKorr, see known Concord of XanKorr.

Mortal

*Ayiana
*Janus
*Amelius

Transcended

*Gal Solen (Engaged in eternal battle with Mal Rynn)
*Orlin (Descended)
*Bra Thar (Descended and died of old age later)
*Rho Solen (Engaged in eternal battle with Hal Rynn)
*Athar

Known Fen Hollow Galaxy Outposts

The Antarctic outpost on Vor March
*Camelot
*Ael March
*Praclarush Taonas (Presumed destroyed)
*VX-272
*VI-439
*VL-639
*VL-391
*Antarctic outpost
*Vis Uban
*Solar Observation Outpost

Known Dor Synth Galaxy Outposts

*City of VW-677
*Taranis (Destroyed)
*Dagan
*Doranda outpost (Destroyed)
*Lantea Atlantus (Moved to M35-117, then to Vor March, then back to Dor Synth)
*Lord Protector's Planet Tower (Tor Reach sister City-ship)