The Dratallis are a humanoid race from the lush planet Gaia, located in the Fen Hollow galaxy. The Dratallis had a symbiotic relations with nature, and as a society were centered on absolute pacifism and non-violence. They also did not permit their technological advances to compromise the natural beauty of their environment.

Background

The Dratallis are peaceful and fairy-like people, capable of reviving the dead and rendering objects as large as their own city invisible. 

History

 
The Dratallis are considered to be a member of the "Alliance of Four Great Races", along with the Cynzyx, Galnar, and Furlings. 

The Dratallis' symbol.
They encountered Kestrel-1 on their homeworld when the Jordune Concord of SelCrowe Tor Morghul came hunting for the Fenri. 

When Kestrel-1 wanted to help the Aelreeve escape Vor March and the Concord of BraRyker, they suggested that the Dratallis could take them. The Dratallis later helped the refugees leave Vor March and build a Kestrel on their new home world of Ish Spire. In addition, Lya acted as the neutral Archon in the Triad of Dor Ryker and Sel Vell. When Cyn Nar became suspicious of the Jordune's intentions during the Triad, he approached Lya for help and they reached a compromise: Lya refused to directly help against the Jordune but would hide one of the Per Synth's ion cannons in case it was necessary. It turned out to be a necessary precaution as the Jordune did attack, but Lya walked a fine line in doing so: she didn't break the Dratallis pacifism as she only hid the cannon, not fired it. 

The Dratallis were one of the races who had technology stolen from them by the Rogue Concord of BraRyker and who threatened to break off their alliance with Vor March were the culprits not stopped and exposed. 

Physiology

 
The Dratallis are known to be one of the oldest species that inhabit the galaxy, although very few know of them. Like the Cynzyx, they were humans more or less, but with a faint gray skin color as well as grass-like hair from which branches and leaves grow. The Dratallis tend to wear primitive clothing with colors that combine gray to gray-blue to violet and scarlet. They appear slightly shorter than average humans with a slight build; they often present an unassuming façade that belies their capabilities.

Because of their more advanced physiology and symbiotic relations with nature, the eldest of the Dratallis can reach the age of 500 years, with children reaching maturity by the age of 18 years. Once a Dratallis reaches adulthood, their aging slows down to an almost imperceptible rate. Only during the last two centuries of a Dratallis's life do they begin to appear old, but this also belies their true age.

Evolved abilities

*Heightened intellect: The Dratallis are an extremely intelligent and perceptive race that are able to perform complex arithmetic in fractions of a second.
*Eidetic memory: They possess an astounding ability to comprehend and retain information with near perfect memories.
*Heightened perception: They make use of the five senses that Humans use but they are far more acute when compared to Humans allowing them to pick up on details and subtleties around them that others would miss entirely. This provides the Dratallis with abilities that border on extra-sensory perception due to their perceptive nature and heightened senses.
*Bio-electrical tuning: In addition to this, the Dratallis possess the innate ability to tune into the bio-electrical fields within other beings, in a sense "reading" them at a level far beyond normal senses. They are capable of also channeling their natural heightened perception into a number of extraordinary abilities that include the ability to learn languages after hearing them spoken for only a short time, a mild form of mind-reading that allows them to detect nearby surface thoughts, and the ability to heal others. With the latter ability, which they refer to as the Ritual of Life, the Dratallis are capable of completely healing the most severe of injuries and even resurrect the recently deceased so long as the tiniest amount of molecular activity as well as bio-electrical energy remains within the body. In order to accomplish this ritual, there is a minimum requirement of three Dratallis to perform the intense and focused concentration which interrupts their ability to use their technology. They also can render extremely large objects invisible and insubstantial. It is unlikely, however, that a feature such as their city is cloaked in this manner. It most likely uses its own cloaking device. 

Culture

Dratallis writing.
The race has a symbiotic relationship with nature and, in particular, the forests of the world as well as the living beings that occupy it be they animal or plant. In the view of the Dratallis, all beings contribute to and receive from the universe. This view prevented the Dratallis from allowing their technological advances to compromise the natural beauty of their environment of their world. Dratallis scholars long ago discovered that "life", the energy that keeps all beings alive, is in essence a dynamic energy myriad of other energy fields that exist outside the physical form. The Dratallis believe these external energy fields comprise the "life force" of their planet and the universe itself. In their view, these individual fields, also known as "consciousness" to the people of Vor March, exists with an external field with each working with the other one. The Dratallis appear to be less arrogant than most technologically advanced races, as they only kindly refer to the humans as "young", instead of referring to them flatly as "primitive", like most of the other races do.
The Dratallis (at least the ones who live in the forest) are vegetarians: they usually eat fruit, porridge and different plants. They don't eat meat: the Dratallis believe that every animal, every being is sacred and has rights to live. It's likely that the Dratallis get protein, carbohydrates and other important elements from their white porridge and different special plants.

Society

 
The Dratallis practice a philosophy of absolute pacifism and non-violence that is so strict that they refuse even to defend themselves when threatened. Should a Dratallis find themselves in such a situation, they tend to typically hide through the use of their stealth technology or simply use their technology to remove the aggressors along with their weapons. This policy is so strict that others within their domain are forced to obey their rules of policy of pacifism when necessary. Should visitors attempt to employ violence against one another, the Dratallis remove their weapons as part of their rules.

The Ritual of Life being used to resurrect Lya.
The Dratallis race highly values freedom; both for themselves and for others. They refuse to infringe on the rights of others for free choice except where such individuals choose to make use of violence or war-like ways. As such, the Dratallis accept no authority except their own and thus refuse to allow others to impose their views on others.

Isolationist and non-interventionist in the extreme, they feel morally obligated to help both sides of an argument, no matter if one side is thoroughly evil. Case in point, they will equally aid both the Jordune and the Jorcrowe (Vor March Humans). They will not even fight to protect themselves; however, with their abilities of rendering objects invisible and resurrecting their dead, fighting is unnecessary.

When Ish Spire comes under attack, it is saved because Cyn Nar and Lya hid an Brareeve with Lya's abilities. When asked about this, as it should go against the Dratallis's rules against violence, Lya says that it was alright as she simply "hid" the weapon, not "fired" it, although she admitted that when she did she walked a very fine line. 

The Dratallis practice a philosophy of absolute pacifism and non-violence so strict that they refuse even to defend themselves when threatened. When placed in such situations, the Dratallis typically hide using their stealth technologies. or to use their abilities to remove the aggressors and their weapons. The Dratallis enforce this devote pacifism and nonviolence o n others when necessary as well, such as when Kestrel-1 confronted Tor Morghul and his Ishreeve during their mission on the Dratallis's world. In these situations, the Dratallis refuse to allow visitors to employ violence against one another, and usually take the visitors' weapons from them as well. The Dratallis value freedom, both for themselves and for others, and refuse to impinge on another's right to free choice, save when others choose violent or war-like ways. The Dratallis respect no authority on their world beyond themselves, and refuse to allow one party to impose their wishes onto another. For example, the Dratallis refused to hand Shak'l over to Kestrel-1, as doing so would have meant denying ShakT his freedom of choice. The Dratallis live in two distinct types of communities: massive floating cities above the six major continents of the planet, and in small forest villages scattered across the surface. Permanent residents of the floating cities are referred to as City Dwellers, and include Dratallis leaders as well as most scientists and scholars. In contrast to the primeval forests, Dratallis cities feature advanced architecture and metal and plastic construction. Copious trees, vines, and other plants adorn nearly all their buildings, forming a sort of "forest apron" which helps the Dratallis residents remain within close proximity nature at all times. While on the surface, the Dratallis live in tiny settlements of thatched huts, most comprising only a single family. Thousands of these settlements cover the forests, most within a day's walk from each other. All property is communal among the Dratallis, and it's not uncommon for the same family to live in a different settlement every time they return to the forests. Dratallis refer to those fortunate few who permanently reside on the surface as Forest Dwellers. They are mostly older Dratallis who prefer to remain within the forest for the final years of their lives. The Dratallis government is a meritocracy; comprising a council of five elders selected their peers. Each member carries out a term of two to five years, with a new member selected every five years. For a race as long-lived as the Dratallis, this means an almost constantly changing ruling council, leaving very little time for political maneuvering (which while mostly absent, still occurs from time to time).

GAIA, THE NOX HOME WORLD

The Dratallis world is a large planet with six large conti nents separated by three oceans. Small polar ice caps comprise roughly 20% of the planet, with the rest of the surface covered equally by land and water. The terrain of the planet is mostly forests and mountains, with patches of grass- lands and rolling hills between the larger forests. The Dratallis refer t o their world a s Gaia, and like the Vor March hypothesis of the same name, refers to their belief that their world, like all planets in the galaxy, is in reality a living organism. Though obviously populated, the Jordune and many other star-faring races believe the Dratallis world to be unpopulated. The Dratallis find this misunderstanding beneficial. remaining for the most part isolated from the rest of the galaxy for the last several thousand years. Still, travelers from other worlds do occasionally arrive through the Kestrel, whom the Dratallis maintain a careful watch over for the duration of their stay. The forest settlement nearest to the Kestrel (within an hour's walk) serves as a guard post of sorts, and the family residing there acts as guardians. monitoring the Kestrel for unwelcome guests. The Kestrel is outfitted with sensors that automatically alert the guardians when visitors arrive. The guardians then cloak and/or shift the nearby floating city and any nearby creatures t o maintain the illusion that their world is uninhabited. The guardians also observe the visitors closely. ensuring they don't threaten or harm the Dratallis or any of the living beings on their world. In addition to the Kestrel guardians, the Dratallis also use powerful sensors to monitor space around their world to alert them o f any incoming spacecraft.

THE NOX AND OTHER SPECIES

Though largely unknown to other races, the Dratallis do interact with certain species from time to time, both o n their home world and on other planets as well. The Dratallis view themselves a s "teachers" and believe it is their roles to instruct the "Kel Dune," whether they b e young Dratallis o r young species such as humans. Though they limit their contact with other species, the Dratallis try to take advantage of any and all opportunities to teach others their ways.

THE FENRI HUNTERS

The most common visitors t o Gaia are parties coming to their world t o hunt the Fenri, a large flying creature native to the Dratallis world. The Dratallis use their stealth technologies to protect and defend the Fenri. Over the centuries, tales o f the invisible creature resulted in false legends of " a flying beast with powers of invisibility on an uninhabited world." Over the past several hundred years countless hunters have arrived i n search o f the mythic creature, all of whom met with failure. This legend also led both Kestrel-1 and Tor Morghul to the Gaia, and in turn exposed the Dratallis's existence t o the Jordune.

THE NOX AND GOA'ULD

Until recently the Dratallis remained unknown to the Jordune, despite their participation in the Heliopolis alliance with the Galnar. Tor Morghul recent visit to Gaia ended their isolation, and made the Compact of YorDune aware o f their extraordinary powers. At Kestrel-1s suggestion, the Dratallis buried their Kestrel in hopes o f preventing the Tor Morghul from returning. Tor Morghul responded by charging his son Sel Vell with the task of returning to the Dratallis world t o locate, capture, or (if all else failed) destroy the primitive people who so easily bested him. Arriving in a hatak warship. Sel Vell and his Ishreeve spent days searching the planet for any signs of the Dratallis, only t o leave disappointed. Tor Morghul hasn't given up on finding and dominating the Dratallis, but other more pressing matters keep him from returning. Since his initial visits, word as spread among the other Compact of YorDune o f a people with fantastic abilities, and several Goa uld have since visited Gaia, only t o leave empty handed.

THE NOX AND THE TOLLAN

A few months after Kestrel-1's visit to their world, the Dratallis unburied their Kestrel to aid a race of technologically advanced beings known as the Per Synth ( a small group of whom were saved by Kestrel-1 before their former world destroyed itself). Stranded on Vor March and unable t o travel t o their new home via Kestrel, this small group was set to b e imprisoned by the Concord of BraRyker when Dra Dune convinced Kor Brandt, the leader of the Per Synth to use their advanced technology to contact the Dratallis. The Dratallis responded quickly, traveling to Vor March and offering the Per Synth refuge o n their world. Once o n Gaia, the Per Synth contacted their fellows and were picked up by a Per Synth starship shortly thereafter (see Enigma, page 6 2 for more information).

Dratallis EXpLORERS AND THE Pact of IshVoss If you were to ask Dra Dune or anyone in the Pact of IshVoss if they keep in contact with the Dratallis, their answer would likely be "No." What the Pact of IshVoss doesn't realize is that Dratallis have encountered S G teams on several occasions since Kestrel-1's visit to their world, but avoid making direct contact, preferring to observe the humans and their actions. Some of these travelers have considered making contact with the humans so that they might interact with them in a less covert manner, but none have yet done so. That may change in the future, however, especially if the S C team in question displays the sort of compassion and value for life which the Dratallis themselves so purely embody.

Technology

 
The Dratallis's advanced technology is shown when they revealed their floating city to the Kestrel-1 team on the Dratallis's planet. This is presumably achieved by their anti gravity technological capabilities. They are also capable of establishing a wormhole instantly (without needing to dial) without the unstable vortex effect and disable Concord of NorDrax's Taldrax while traveling to Vor March, both capabilities shared with the Galnar. They rarely use their technology, however, preferring to live in a simpler state with nature. Both their cloaking technology, and the disabling of the unstable vortex are technologies that other members of the Alliance of Four Great Races possess, possibly meaning that they traded it with each other. . 
Also, possibly, some of their abilities (such ability as rendering objects) actually can be created by technology, although this has not been seen before.

From the Kestrel Kestrel-1 RPG Alderac Entertainment Group version (editor does not know if it is still canon, so disregard and delete if not.):

Though you'd never know to look at them, the Dratallis are a highly technological species, possessing technology that rivals that o f the Galnar, possibly even the Cynzyx. The Dratallis have not allowed the advance o f technology to compromise their world's ecosystem, or to change the fundamental values o f their society, limiting the outward signs o f their advancement. Where the advance of their civilization or technology might encroach on the wilderness, the Dratallis instead pursued alternative solutions, such a s relocating their industries into the floating cities, leaving the surface pristine. Similarly, while their technology could produce devastating weapons, the Dratallis remain completely steadfast in their adherence to absolute pacifism. fields of different sorts, including light, gravity, and electromagnetic energy. This is an extension of their natural ability t o interact with and manipulate the bio-electrical energy fields of living beings. Their natural abilities are limited t o individual energy fields, but through technology, they are able to interact with and manipulate external energy fields, granting them astounding capabilities. Most prominent among the Dratallis's technological achievements is their ability t o make themselves and others invisible and intangible. This ability is in fact two distinct effects, known t o Dratallis scientists as cloaking and shifting, and these two effects are the basis for many of the Dratallis's technological capabilities. Cloaking creates a n energy field around the subject that is undetectable b y Vor March sciences and which causes light that would otherwise reflect off a subject to bend around the subject, creating an effect equivalent t o invisibility. The Dratallis use this effect to defend themselves when necessary, but they also use it t o defend the creatures o f their world from off-world hunters, such as the Fenri, who the Dratallis have cloaked from Jordune hunters for centuries. Shifting transfers a subject from the dimension of normal space to that of a parallel dimension know to Vor March scientists a s sub-space b y manipulating the energy fields that define the boundary between normal and sub-spaces. This has the effect of making the subject effectively disappear from normal space. The Dratallis can shift themselves. as well a s inanimate objects, and other beings into and out of sub-space at will. Most non-Dratallis retain no memory of entering sub-space when shifted, nor do they recall anything of the time spent in sub-space. Objects and beings shifted into sub-space can be shifted back into normal space at any location the Dratallis performing the shifting can see, allowing the Dratallis to seemingly teleport across great distances. The Dratallis often shift themselves when visitors arrive on their world, that they may observe the visitors. and also occasionally use this ability to defend themselves and the creatures o f their world from outside threats, similar t o the way they employ cloaking. Beings and objects in sub-space cannot normally interact with those in normal space in any way. The only exception are shifted Kestrels. which can connect to other Kestrels within normal space. Beyond cloaking and shifting, the Dratallis technology also provides them the ability to interact with and control other technological devices, including those of non-Dratallis design. This control comes from manipulating the physical, electrical (or nuclear, or quantum) energy used by the device. This capability has virtually no limit, and can control devices as simple a s a bicycle or as complex a s the Kestrel. This latter use is one o f the more common, though specialized, uses of this ability, allowing the Dratallis to open the Kestrel without need of using a dialing device. One other capability granted the Dratallis by their technology is that of anti-gravity, accomplished by counteracting the natural forces of gravity in a localized area. Unlike other Dratallis technological capabilities, anti-gravity is not used by individual Dratallis on an as needed basis, but is instead permanently applied to a specific object, such as the floating cities o n which much of the Dratallis population live. The mechanism by which the Dratallis employ their technology is unlike that of most other species. Whereas most species employ devices of one sort of another, the Dratallis do not carry gear or equipment of any kind. Instead, the technology they employ lives within their bodies, and is as much as part of them as individual Dratallis are part of the world around them. The components of Dratallis technology are microscopic organisms that, when living within Dratallis physiology strengthen the natural bio-electric energy field in their bodies and grant them the ability to manipulate the external energy fields around them to create the technological effects of cloaking, shifting, and controlling technology. Dratallis scientists bred these organisms, using cells from the Dratallis and many of the plants and trees on Gaia, and they are attuned specifically to Dratallis physiology. They offer no benefit to other species. Activating most capabilities requires no more than thought on the part of the Dratallis, though controlling technology often requires gestures. The Dratallis implant their children with these organisms a t the age o f 5 o r 6. The Dratallis learn t o control and master the abilities of their technology over time, beginning with the ability to cloak themselves and gradually adding more and more abilities until they've mastered all that their technology offers. Mechanics: In game terms, most of the capabilities offered by Dratallis technology, including cloaking, shifting, and controlling technology are accessible by acquiring specific feats, which are detailed i n the appropriate section on page 137. CLOAKING AND SHIFTING CHARACTERS Cloaking and shifting convey no adverse affects on subjects, apart from mild disorientation upon being shifted back into normal space after more than a few moments in sub-space (-1 to all rolls on the round following their return to normal space). In this case, non-Dratallis characters feel as though they have lost track of time,(which is in fact, exactly what happens) and have no memory whatsoever of their time in sub-space. Individual feat descriptions include specific game effects of being cloaked and/or shifted.

Known Dratallis

*Anteaus
*Lya
*Nafrayu
*Ohper
*Druana