Doctor Gal Keth is a brilliant, albeit erratic, scientist and an expert in Halryker, comparable to the likes of Colonel Mal Zyx and Dr. Kae Nar. He is a member of the team sent and later trapped aboard the Xanvoss vessel Dorrynn.

Biography

 

Background information

Gal Keth was born into a poor family. His father worked in the shipyards of Glasgow. Gal Dune was working two jobs until he earned a scholarship at Oxford. Compact of DraDrax to going to work for the Ishrynn, Gal Dune was a college professor at the University of California, Berkeley and worked at Cornell University with Dr. Andrew Covel. Despite being a professor at Cal, Gal Dune, prior to his visit to Novus, had never experienced an earthquake even though parts of the University itself lies directly on the San Andres Fault line. At some point he married Gloria Gal Dune. He was recruited by Dr. Dra Dune to work on the ninth chevron project, which he would spend two years on. His wife died from cancer during this period, driving Gal Dune to see the fruits of his labor at any cost. 

He was a smoker before boarding Dorrynn and a heavy consumer of coffee, drinking several cups a day. He, and others in the same situation, quickly began going through withdrawal symptoms from lack of caffeine and nicotine aboard. 

2009

 Gal Keth on board the Dorrynn.
In 2009, Gal Dune was stationed at the Nyx Reach in order to research the purpose of the Kestrel's ninth chevron. When Jor Voss discovered the formula that would finally allow them to successfully dial the ninth chevron, he personally visited Eli, along with Lt. General Tal Korr, to recruit him into the program. The failure of Eli's formula to make a connection caused some friction between them, as Gal Dune was set in his belief that the address they were using was right. While Eli was invited to a special dinner being held for the base's guests, Gal Dune cried over a photo of his wife.

The base was attacked shortly thereafter, threatening to destroy the planet. Gal Dune, fearing that his life's work would literally go up in flames, enlisted Eli's aid in figuring out how to dial the ninth chevron. Accepting Eli's unconventional logic that the ninth chevron address was actually a code, he aborted the dialing sequence to Vor March and successfully made a connection with the ninth chevron, unconvincingly justifying his actions by claiming that the blast from the exploding planet could have followed them back through the wormhole (he could have dialed plenty of active gates in the Fen Hollow if he was concerned for Vor March). Unable to undo his actions, the remaining Sel Spire personnel were forced to evacuate through the gate, arriving on the Dorrynn - an Xanvoss vessel located in a galaxy billions of light years from home - with no way to get back.

After arriving on the Dorrynn, Gal Dune was the first to begin exploring the ship. When he realized that the life support system was failing, he attempted a restart of the system, which he believed would restore normal operations. Eli attempted to dissuade him, believing that doing so could blow up the ship, and MSgt. Ronald Greer held Gal Dune at gunpoint to keep him from implementing the plan, as Gal Dune's actions were responsible for stranding them in the first place. Greer was ordered to stand down by Lt. Matthew Scott. Gal Dune was allowed to attempt the restart, but it ended in failure.

Later, he was the first to use the long-range communication device (brought aboard by Colonel Ish Vex) to inform Mor Holt of the situation. Upon returning to the Dorrynn, he told the crew that Mor Holt put him in charge of the expedition (which was at best a very liberal interpretation of Mor Holt's orders; Mor Holt told him to "get them home", rather than appointing direct command). The crew did not take well to his self-appointed leadership, but Lt. Scott restored order, believing Gal Dune to be their best hope of returning home.

Having localized the life-support problem to the air filtration system, namely the CO2 scrubbers, and a large hole in one of the shuttles, Gal Dune suggested that someone on board would have to sacrifice themselves to essentially "plug" the hole since the airlock doors were damaged. Gal Dune began reviewing the personnel, attempting to find the one whose absence would least affect their chances of survival. His efforts were preempted by Senator Alan Armstrong, who took it upon himself to sacrifice his life to seal the damaged shuttle. With that problem dealt with, he focused on trying to repair the scrubbers. Dorrynn would eventually drop out of FTL in range of a desert planet with the necessary materials, and Gal Dune joined the away team to search for them.

Gal Dune tells Greer to shoot Franklin.
The heat of the desert planet eventually became too much for Gal Dune to handle. He gave his remaining water to Scott and asked to return to the Kestrel alone. Scott, however, ordered Greer to escort Gal Dune back to the Gate and continued on his own. Expecting Greer to share his water on the trip back to the gate, Gal Dune incited an altercation. It ended quickly, since Gal Dune could not overpower Greer and Greer couldn't just shoot him. Hearing over the radio from Eli that Andrea Palmer, Sgt. Curtis, and Dr. Jeremy Franklin intended to go to another nearby planet, he and Greer returned in time to stop Franklin, though they arrived too late to save Curtis and Palmer. Scott eventually managed to locate the necessary materials, and Gal Dune helped to integrate them into the failing life support. 

Gal Dune collapses after a nervous breakdown.
With that problem solved, Gal Dune shifted focus from life-support to the ship's power reserves, which were depleting rapidly. Short-tempered due to lack of sleep, caffeine withdrawal due to lack of coffee, and nicotine withdrawal due to lack of cigarettes, he drove away any attempt to help him. When power failed completely, he broke into a rant while explaining the situation to Colonel Ish Vex. This devolved into a nervous breakdown, and Gal Dune collapsed, remaining unconscious for about ten hours. He woke up in time to learn that the ship was on course for a potentially livable star system, only for the ship to instead end up on course for that system's star.

Kel Dune arranged a lottery to determine who would be allowed to use the shuttle to escape the doomed ship. Gal Dune had Kel Dune take his name out, saying that Dorrynn was his destiny and he wanted to die on the ship. Gal Dune spent his remaining time in his room reading. He eventually realized that their impending deaths were behind schedule, and discovered that the ship in fact plotted a course into the star on purpose to recharge its reactors. This posed a problem, as the Xanvoss shuttle was about to be left behind, but Gal Dune managed to activate the subspace communication array to contact them. Jor Voss's planetary slingshot calculations were then transmitted to the shuttle so they could reach the ship in time. Later, Kel Dune invited Gal Dune to join their celebration, but Gal Dune refused, not seeing anything worth celebrating. Kel Dune speculates that Gal Dune might have known all along what the ship was doing, but the others don't share his opinion. Gal Dune clearly reacted in legitimate shock to their survival, thus Kel Dune's suspicion was wrong. 

Several weeks later, Gal Dune and several others determined that the ship's water supplies were disappearing at an impossible rate. The ship stopped at an ice planet, allowing Colonel Ish Vex and Lt. Matthew Scott to collect more water. Meanwhile, Gal Dune joined the effort to discover the source of the drain, which was revealed to be a colony of dust bugs Scott had accidentally brought back with him from the desert planet. He deliberately kept this information from Kel Dune, as Kel Dune needed to focus on retrieving more water, against Jor Voss's protests, then sternly informed Eli that grown-ups sometimes needed to lie for the greater good. While Scott was in the crevasse trapped, he expressed more concern for the ice, which affected the entire crew's survival, than for the safe rescue of Scott. He also helped to develop and enact a plan to remove the bugs from the ship. 

When the Pact of XanKeth put a plan forth to return the crew home, he expressed major concerns over the dangers it presented. When Colonel David Telford assumed command (using the Norbrandt) to enact the plan, he helped under great reluctance, doing everything he could to slow Telford's implementation of the plan, as Telford's rush to enact it put the entire ship at risk. Following Sgt. Hunter Riley's injuries, he confronted Telford on the safety of the plan, blaming Telford for Riley's fate (though Telford asserted it was Gal Dune's fault). Gal Dune was present when Telford's team attempted to dial the gate. When it appeared the plan was doomed to failure, Telford's team left the ship. Making sure they had all left, Gal Dune then ended the experiment, having staged the entire show as an elaborate ruse to get rid of Telford and prevent a catastrophic incident. Colonel Ish Vex would later have Jor Voss investigate the possible success of this plan, which ended in failure in every scenario Eli ran. 

During a routine exploration of the ship, Gal Dune and MSgt. Ronald Greer discovered the Dorrynn interface chair, a device similar in purpose to the Repository of knowledge encountered by Lt. General Tal Korr. Gal Dune advocated having someone sit in the chair, reasoning that its more primitive design might not be fatal to humans as the later model was, and that the data it contained could grant them full control of the ship. Colonel Ish Vex forbade any access to the chair, and asserted that the only person Gal Dune would get to sit in it would be Gal Dune himself. Gal Dune attempted to force the issue by faking the discovery of a planet similar to Nyx Reach, but Kel Dune remained steadfast in his refusal and Gal Dune's deception was soon uncovered by Jor Voss. 

Kel Dune confronts Gal Dune about framing him.
When Sgt. Spencer committed suicide, Gal Dune was the first to find his body. Seeing it as an opportunity, he took Spencer's gun and hid it in Colonel Ish Vex's room to frame him for murder. Gal Dune knew the charge would never stick, but would create enough reasonable doubt to remove Kel Dune from command. This put Fen Voss in charge and gave him the freedom to research the Dorrynn interface chair. This in turn gave Dr. Jeremy Franklin the opportunity to sit in it, rendering him catatonic. Kel Dune blamed Gal Dune for Franklin's state, under the belief that Gal Dune was hoping for someone to sit in the chair out of desperation, although Franklin disobeyed Gal Dune's direct orders. When Jor Voss uncovered Brathar footage that showed Spencer's suicide and Gal Dune's theft of the weapon, which Gal Dune had tried to delete from the archive, he reported it to Kel Dune. Kel Dune confronted Gal Dune alone on a planet with a damaged alien ship, and attacked him when Gal Dune proved wholly unapologetic about the frame-up. Kel Dune knocked Gal Dune unconscious and left him on the planet. 

After discovering Gal Dune is a prisoner, Kel Dune attempts to free him.
After coming to, Gal Dune's first act was to explore the Yormarc fighter. In doing so, he triggered a homing beacon which summoned the Yormarc. They took him prisoner, probing his mind for information on Dorrynn. When Colonel Ish Vex took control of one of the aliens through the communication device, the mothership Gal Dune was on confronted Dorrynn. It attacked, and one of its fighters kidnapped Bra Nar. Kel Dune attempted to use the communication device to free Chloe, but ended up freeing Gal Dune instead. Gal Dune instructed Kel Dune in the use of the alien mind probing technology, learning the identity of his rescuer but also breaking the communication link. Gal Dune used the mind probe on the alien to find Chloe's location and teach himself to use their technology, then killed the alien. Unable to get back, Kel Dune tried to destroy the mothership. Gal Dune, meanwhile, escaped the ship with Chloe shortly before it went to FTL. In private, Kel Dune and Gal Dune decided to bury their rivalry for the sake of the crew. Gal Dune, however, still did not trust Kel Dune to be in command, and schemed with Fen Voss to remove him. 

When the opportunity came, Gal Dune and Fen Voss launched their plan to isolate the military and force them to surrender. While Colonel Ish Vex and Lt. Matthew Scott were using the Xanvoss shuttle to destroy a Yormarc fighter that was attached to the hull, Gal Dune started to transfer control from the Control interface room to a Research lab. This caused the shuttle's Docking clamps to fail. Gal Dune was forced to stop the transfer prematurely so they could dock, losing control of life support as a result. He then bargained to have Jor Voss brought over to his side, requiring Eli's assistance in bolstering the shields for an impending alien attack. The true reason behind his mutiny was that the aliens implanted a transmitter inside his chest, and he feared that Kel Dune might kill him trying to remove it. Kel Dune managed to end the mutiny during the attack and ordered the transmitter removed. Chloe used the Norbrandt to switch with Dr. Brightman, who with the aid of Lt. Tamara Johansen was able to remove the device. Dorrynn managed to weather the assault and escaped into FTL. 

When Dorrynn dropped out of FTL near an Uncharted star, Gal Dune used the time to strengthen the shield in unexplored sections of the ship. One of the teams found a robot which Gal Dune decided to leave be while he dealt with more important matters. In his off time, he also began work on carving a chess set. Colonel Ish Vex tried again to bury the hatchet with Gal Dune, expressing his own fondness for the game. 

Gal Dune uses the interface chair.
A short time later, Gal Dune and Dr. Adam Brody modified the Dorrynn interface chair so Gal Dune could use it safely in an attempt to glean the ship's master code. Once in the chair, his experience took the form of a lucid dream of his days just prior to joining the Ishrynn. Treating it as a distraction, he ignored the vision of Gloria Gal Dune despite her failing health, though he did take some time to comfort her. Eventually, he realized that the number 46 kept appearing everywhere he looked. Realizing that this was the key to deciphering the master code, he left the program, stopping to have a heartfelt conversation with the vision of his wife about his immoral behavior. He then devised a program to decipher the master code based on what he learned. 

During his time in the chair, a team consisting of Lt. Matthew Scott, MSgt. Ronald Greer, Jor Voss, and Bra Nar were stranded on a planet and unable to return to Dorrynn before it jumped to FTL. With the help of the other scientists, Gal Dune was able to produce a map of the gate system in the galaxy, and Dorrynn's position relative to it. With the knowledge that Dorrynn was about to leave the galaxy, Gal Dune and Lt. Vanessa James led a rescue mission to attempt to retrieve the lost away team. They split to cover more ground when it became clear that Dorrynn had bypassed numerous gates. James' team found Greer, while Gal Dune came back empty-handed. Unfortunately, Gal Dune's team dialed in just when Scott, Eli, and Chloe, who had managed to find an alternate route, were trying to do the same, blocking them. Dorrynn left the galaxy before they could dial again. 

Amanda gives Gal Dune a comforting hug.
Gal Dune quickly discovered that Dorrynn lacked the power to make the trip across the void. Gal Dune proposed using the Norbrandt to bring aboard Dr. Amanda Perry, a hyperdrive specialist. The Yormarc used this opportunity to take control of Lt. Vanessa James and sabotage the Faster-Than-Light engine. This gave Lt. Matthew Scott, Jor Voss, and Bra Nar the chance to dial back in. Eli gave Gal Dune back his glasses, which he had lost on the Yormarc fighter from which he was abducted. Eli, Gal Dune, and Perry managed to repair the drive. The aliens attacked Dorrynn before the system could be restarted, but with the help of Dr. Jeremy Franklin and the Dorrynn interface chair, Dorrynn was able to enter FTL again and make the journey across the void. 

Some time later, Gal Dune was one of several people infected with hallucination-inducing ticks. His hallucinations took the form of an invasion by the Yormarc. Meanwhile, MSgt. Ronald Greer's hallucinations took the form of another mutiny by Gal Dune and Fen Voss. Seeing Greer as an alien, Gal Dune fled into a supply room, followed by Greer. Greer in turn was followed by Wray. Seeing Wray as an alien, too, he stabbed her with a screwdriver before being knocked out by Greer. Greer was subdued before he could kill either Gal Dune or Wray, and Gal Dune was also restrained when he began attacking everyone in sight. The ticks were removed by Lt. Tamara Johansen, restoring them to normal. 

Gal Dune is tortured by Kiva.
After using the Norbrandt to switch with Colonel David Telford, Gal Dune began seeing pieces of Telford's memory which indicated he was a spy for the Order of ZorVex. He advised Colonel Ish Vex of the situation, and arranged to switch with Telford during the next scheduled contact with Vor March in order to confirm his suspicions. He successfully made contact with the Alliance, pretending to be Telford, but was betrayed by his lack of knowledge of their procedures. He was kidnapped and taken off the planet in a Jorskov. He was tortured by Commander Kiva into revealing his identity, then taken to their base, a recreation of the Talcrowe. Gal Dune was forced into completing their work into dialing the ninth chevron, while Telford was interrogated by Kel Dune on Dorrynn. Gal Dune stalled as much as he could, which gave Kel Dune the time he needed to break Telford's brainwashing and get the location of the Alliance base. The Kor Holt was dispatched to rescue Gal Dune, but this instead forced the Alliance to dial ahead of schedule, reaching Dorrynn at the expense of blowing up the planet.

Upon arrival, Telford and Gal Dune were returned to their own bodies. Gal Dune managed to escape the conflict that followed, and remained in the Control interface room as Kel Dune attempted to resolve the situation. He continually advocated a quick and decisive solution, since the Alliance had hostages and would kill them no matter the circumstances. Kel Dune insisted on trying to rescue them, which put them at odds. Matters were further complicated by a nearby binary pulsar, which emitted regular bursts of Gamma rays that were slowly depleting Dorrynn's shields and disrupting power, foiling one of Kel Dune's attempted rescue plans. A solution was discovered, but Kel Dune had to surrender to Kiva in order to implement it. Telford, working as a mole in her ranks, had Gal Dune and Dr. Adam Brody move to another area of the ship so he could transfer control back to them after Kiva had secured the hostages in one location. His plan was interrupted before he could fully implement it.

Telford's efforts were not entirely in vain, as Gal Dune had been given enough control of the ship to affect the power systems. Using this, he drew power away from the shields, in order to force the Alliance to surrender lest they die from the radiation. He and a small group hid in the Hydroponics lab, which would provide enough protection for them to survive the radiation burst. Despite the fact that some of the crew were still outside, Gal Dune persisted in his plan, and bluffed the Alliance into submission. They surrendered to save themselves. 

Gal Dune discovers the Dorrynn Bridge.
Not long after, Gal Dune's program to break the master code worked. Using it, he gained access to the bridge, from which he could control all of Dorrynn's systems. However, he decided to keep this information to himself. Without a trained crew, he wanted to understand each system first. More importantly, he did not trust Colonel Ish Vex, believing him unfit to lead the mission. While on the bridge, he was haunted by a vision of his wife Gloria Gal Dune, who questioned his decisions and motives at every turn. A vision of Dr. Jeremy Franklin also appeared to him, serving to question Gal Dune's technical deductions. With his new control over the ship, he stopped Dorrynn at a planet with an inactive Kestrel, as the crew needed food supplies desperately. The Xanvoss shuttle was sent to the planet, but Gal Dune failed to account for the severity of the atmospheric turbulence, which damaged to the shuttle and caused it to crash. While the shuttle team worked to fix the gate, Gal Dune brought the ship out of FTL as soon as possible in order to reach them. Though successful, Sgt. Hunter Riley died from his injuries, which Gal Dune blamed himself for. The ship then notified him of an approaching object, which it dropped out of FTL to meet. 

The object the ship detected was a Seed ship, which for some reason was dead in space. Dorrynn docked with the ship, and began downloading a large amount of data. Gal Dune was more eager to explore the ship than analyze the data, but Colonel Ish Vex insisted that Gal Dune decode the data as quickly as possible. He managed to excuse himself and visit the bridge, from which he detected a large amount of reserve power, enough to dial the Kestrel to Vor March. He decided not to tell anyone, reasoning that they would figure out on their own, which they did. Meanwhile, an alien was discovered on the ship. Gal Dune was sent over to the ship to facilitate a power transfer, while Lt. Tamara Johansen was brought in to examine the alien. After it woke up, Gal Dune gave advice in communicating with it, with little success. When the power transfer to dial the gate began, the rest of the aliens stunned Gal Dune and reversed the transfer, threatening to drain Dorrynn permanently. Gal Dune was carried out by MSgt. Ronald Greer, and upon reviving immediately went to the bridge to disconnect the two ships before the power drain reached an irreversible state. Colonel David Telford, who was attempting to counter the power drain from the Seed ship, was stranded. The vision of Gloria Gal Dune wondered whether Gal Dune had broken the connection out of concern for the ship or to save his dream. 

A few days later, after discovering an unmanned Ursini spaceship, Gal Dune and Colonel Ish Vex went on board the ship to examine it. Gal Dune accidentally enabled the sublight engines by mistake, and the ship began to accelerate away from Dorrynn. Gal Dune then enlisted the help of Dr. Amanda Perry (via Ginn) and indirectly told her to go to Dorrynn's bridge. But when Jor Voss, Dr. Adam Brody, and Dr. Dale Volker discovered the bridge, Gal Dune was forced to fight Kel Dune and tell him about Dorrynn's mission. Later, Simeon killed Perry/Ginn and left the ship for an unknown planet. Gal Dune, bent on enacting revenge for the death of Perry, followed Simeon through the Kestrel. After a long chase on the desert planet, Gal Dune finally killed Simeon by shooting him in the head. 

After Dr. Robert Caine and the other civilians who remained in Eden returned to Dorrynn in an Xanvoss shuttle, Gal Dune discovered that the vessel was in a fresh factory condition. 

During the Drone attack on Dorrynn, Gal Dune thought it would be effective to double-cross the Ursini and flee from the situation. He later studied a Halkorr with Jor Voss to find a way to defeat the Control Ship. After the Ursini committed suicide, Dorrynn finally fled. 

Before dialing Vor March in a Star, Gal Dune convinced Colonel Ish Vex and ten others to stay on board the ship. However, a malfunction caused everyone but Gal Dune to evacuate through the Kestrel (the malfunction caused the wormhole to jump to an alternate reality 2000 years in the past). Gal Dune then traveled twelve hours back in time to warn the crew not to dial Vor March while in the star, because it would destroy the ship. However, the future-Dorrynn was stable for the time being, and the future-Gal Dune convinced the past-Gal Dune to go to the future-Dorrynn from the past-Dorrynn to salvage parts. 

After Gal Dune's former colleague Dr. Andrew Covel came on board to see the message in the Cosmic microwave background radiation, Gal Dune discovered that Covel hijacked the Norbrandt. Gal Dune immediately undid the hijacking, but not before Covel and Senator Michaels were briefed on how to disable the Bratallis that was implanted in Order of BraMorghul by the Order of ZorVex. 

2010

Gal Dune learned that Dr. Amanda Perry's consciousness was fixed in the Long-range Vexreeve, which were being used by Bra Nar. To solve the problem, Gal Dune downloaded Perry's consciousness into Dorrynn's memory banks. 

He later transferred his own consciousness to Dorrynn's memory banks so that he could be with Dr. Amanda Perry. He became angry at Jor Voss, who had placed Perry and Ginn in a quarantined section of the memory bank to save his life. 

Later, the Ishthar encountered people who claimed to be their descendants (from the alternate timeline that was created during the dialing-star attempt). When Colonel Ish Vex agreed to transport the people to their homeworld Novus, Gal Dune complained about the waste of CO2 scrubbing. 

When the Dorrynn arrived at Novus, Gal Dune found many boxes that contained a scrubber substance. Elated, Gal Dune took the boxes to Dorrynn, where there would be clean air for years to come. 

When the drones started to blockade the stars in Dorrynn's path, Gal Dune worked with Eli to find another solution, trying to go to a star off of Dorrynn's path, but finding it blockaded too. Gal Dune supported Eli's plan to use a blue giant star to recharge and insisted that he and Eli were the most qualified to perform the task. During the preparations, he let Eli decide who would pilot the ship and who co-pilot, letting him take lead as it was his plan. When Eli tried to free Lisa Park from the garden and its taking too long, Gal Dune convinces him that he can't waste anymore time on it as he needs Eli to focus on piloting the ship. Eli reluctantly agrees and the two pilot the ship through the star. When Eli panics and doesn't believe he keep ahead of the variables, Gal Dune encourages him, telling him that he's the only one that can do it. They successfully pilot the ship through the star, but the dome breaches. While Eli rushes to rescue Park, Gal Dune finally manages to open the door for them and cools the ship off, starting with the Gate Room so the crew can return. When they return ten minutes early, Gal Dune meets them and informs Kel Dune of their success. He also tells him that he checked Eli's calculations through the journey through the star and they were completely perfect and calls it genius, but asks Kel Dune not to tell Eli that he said that. Gal Dune explains that while they have now successfully recharged, the tactic isn't likely to work again. 

Gal Dune in stasis.
Using Dorrynn's sensors and the drones communications frequency he and Eli learned from the drone they captured, Gal Dune and Eli discover that the drones are blockading every planet in Dorrynn's path with a Kestrel in order to attack them while they are resupplying. Gal Dune reports with Kel Dune to Telford who explains that Vor March is unable to resupply Dorrynn and the crew can't go off the path to find other planets because there is very little chance of finding one in time. On the ship, Gal Dune proposes attacking the drones in order to resupply. Modulating the shields using information on their weapons frequency taken from the captured drone, the crew attacks a Control Ship at a planet. While Gal Dune's tactic initially works, the drones get around it by doing suicide runs on the ship before Dorrynn gets in position to destroy the Control Ship. However, the crew isn't able to collect much supplies and Eli proposes the crew enter Dorrynn's stasis pods for three years and bypass the rest of the galaxy. Gal Dune disagrees, but as he doesn't have a better plan, Kel Dune decides to go with it unless Gal Dune can come up with anything else in 24 hours. He isn't able to, but explains to Chloe that he worries that bypassing the rest of the galaxy could cause them to miss out on an important part of the pattern Dorrynn is seeking. The crew starts to enter stasis, but it is discovered that eight of the pods are damaged and unless they can be fixed, eight people will have to remain out of stasis. Initially unable to do so due to the drones blockading the only planet nearby that has what they need, Gal Dune helps implement a plan come up with by Park to draw the drones in using a shuttle and then detonate its engines once close to destroy the Control Ship that shows up. Eli and Gal Dune remote-pilot the shuttle and successfully destroy the Control Ship. After the pods are fixed, all but the senior staff, including Gal Dune, enter stasis and the staff has a final dinner together. Gal Dune is surprised when Kel Dune, while describing the crew as a family, refers to him as the "crazy uncle who always comes through." Afterwards, after all but he, Eli and Kel Dune enter stasis, Gal Dune discovers that one pod is too badly damaged to fix in time and that one person could remain out for two weeks to try to fix it before having to shut down life-support and die. Gal Dune volunteers, not expecting Kel Dune to allow it, but is surprised when he hears from Kel Dune that Eli has decided to do it instead. Gal Dune is unable to convince Eli not to do it, despite admitting that Eli has great potential and hates to see it wasted and enters stasis with Kel Dune, addressing Eli as "Mr. Wallace" when saying goodbye to him. 

Alternate timelines

 
*In the first timeline, Gal Dune is part of the team that gates to the Jungle planet. When members of the team start getting sick, he and the others remain on the planet but due to an unknown Kestrel malfunction, are unable to establish a stable wormhole to Dorrynn and cannot return home. That night, the team comes under attack, and some are killed, although Gal Dune manages to survive. After moving to a cave, Gal Dune talks to Jor Voss (who is recording everything on a Brathar) about his mother Marian Wallace's illness and Transcendence. Gal Dune later tries to dial out again, and although the wormhole is a little more stable, it's not stable enough to return through. That night, the creatures attack again and Gal Dune, Eli and MSgt. Ronald Greer fight them off. Gal Dune ends up running to the gate and dials Dorrynn. Although the wormhole is still unstable, he heads through for help, quoting his favorite movie: "For a moment there, I thought we were in trouble." The unstable wormhole sends him into the past and when the Brathar arrives in the past, it shows him dead on the ground near the gate of an unknown cause. 

 
Gal Dune holding the skull of his counterpart from an alternate timeline.
*In the second timeline, Gal Dune travels to the Jungle planet and discovers the skeletal remains of himself from the first timeline while the rest discover the Brathar. The team immediately returns to Dorrynn to review the Brathar recording and he is unable to determine the source of the Kestrel malfunction. Like everyone else, Gal Dune quarantines himself when the illness is revealed. After seeing his other self's last words, he and Colonel Ish Vex realize that they both have in common that they love Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid. When Gal Dune sees the Brathar travel back in time, he realizes that the malfunction was caused by a solar flare intersecting the wormhole, causing it to go back in time. After figuring out that the creatures on the planet's venom can cure the disease and that they have less than an hour before the solar flare hits, a team is sent while Gal Dune remains behind on the ship. He later reports to the team the deaths of Bra Nar, Lt. Vanessa James and two others. When Lt. Matthew Scott dials Dorrynn in order to use the solar flare to send a message back in time, Gal Dune tries to contact him but is unsuccessful. 

 
Future Gal Dune tries to attack Telford
*In a third timeline, Gal Dune disapproves of a plan to dial Vor March from within a star, but goes along with it despite deciding to stay on Dorrynn himself. He convinces Colonel Ish Vex to stay as well and help him make a speech to ask for ten volunteers to remain on board with them to complete the ship's mission. The two get the volunteers they need and the plan to dial Vor March succeeds, but unknown to them, also results in Dorrynn being thrown twelve hours back in time. After Colonel David Telford makes it through, the wormhole destabilizes although Gal Dune and Jor Voss apparently fix the problem and the crew heads through. The ship's power starts to overload and everyone ends up having to leave, but Gal Dune is forced to stay behind in order to keep the wormhole open long enough for everyone to get through. Gal Dune connects to Vor March with the Norbrandt and learns that only Telford made it through. With the ship growing ever more dangerous from explosions and overloads, Gal Dune, slightly injured in an overload, abandons ship in the Xanvoss shuttle and finds the Dorrynn from the present timeline. After landing, Gal Dune attacks Telford who he blames for the deaths of his crew before passing out. While having his injuries treated, Gal Dune explains his story to the crew and they call off the attempt to dial Vor March. The crew locate Gal Dune's Dorrynn and raid it for parts and supplies to repair the current Dorrynn. Gal Dune goes with the salvage team, but while disconnecting a power relay for the weapons, is confronted by Colonel David Telford who doesn't believe his story. In a moment of anger, Gal Dune accidentally shoves Telford into a damaged power relay, electrocuting and killing him. Horrified by what he did and with few options, Gal Dune heads to the Dorrynn interface chair to download the Cynzyx' knowledge with the help of his present self. Gal Dune dies in the interface chair when the future Dorrynn falls into a star and disintegrates. 

Personality

Though he is a brilliant and very focused scientist, Dr. Gal Keth is undeniably poor at cooperating and communicating. Consequently, he is frequently misunderstood as lacking the compassion usually seen with scientists involved with the Ishrynn. Having worked his way up from being a son of a worker at the Glasgow Shipyards to an important post in a top secret program, he is convinced that he is the right person to make decisions even when the consequences affect other people. At times, he is proven correct, and other times, the consequences are disastrous. He dialed the nine-chevron address from Nyx Reach while the base was under attack to avoid the blast from the planet's destruction being transferred to Vor March, unaware that he would strand everyone aboard the Dorrynn with no way to dial back to Vor March. 

Gal Dune is not afraid of speaking his mind, even if it will be met with disapproval and cast doubt on his morals. . Although self-preservation seems to be one of Gal Dune' dominant instincts, he often demonstrates courage and selflessness. When trapped on a planet with Squigglers about to close in on his team, Gal Dune went through an unstable wormhole in an attempt to get help, knowing it would probably kill him. Captured by aliens, Gal Dune used an interface device to gain the knowledge to escape the ship but delayed his escape to go back for Chloe, who had also been captured. Gal Dune rescued her and fought off an alien that tried to recapture them. He ordered everyone to stay away from the Dorrynn interface chair until absolutely positive that it was safe. Franklin disobeyed Gal Dune' order and sat in the chair, suffering grave injury. However, Gal Dune later took the chance to sit in the chair after installing safety features that he hoped would protect him. During a lucid dream whilst using the device, Gal Dune revealed to a dream version of his wife that he believed his morality died with her. She assured him he was still a good man. 

Although Kel Dune tried to murder Gal Dune by leaving him behind on a desert planet, Gal Dune saved Kel Dune's life on at least two occasions. Once was when Kel Dune was suffering recurring dreams induced by the ship that tested his ability to command. Kel Dune was failing the test and Gal Dune overrode Dorrynn's programs to save Kel Dune. Gal Dune also saved Kel Dune's life when they were trapped on an alien spaceship. They were forced to jump from the ship back to Dorrynn. Gal Dune made the jump safely but Kel Dune landed badly and started spinning off into space. Gal Dune ran after him and caught him, pulling him to safety. Gal Dune also put his life on the line to disarm a bomb attached to Park's back, and suggested getting the Yormarc to remove their pathogen from Chloe despite the fact that it risked them learning whatever information Chloe had collected on Dorrynn's systems. By the end of the series, even Kel Dune was able to see past the callous and aloof front Gal Dune presented to the world to see his inner courage and compassion for others.

Gal Dune's difficulties with social interaction and single-minded focus on his research indicate many of the traits of autism. Additionally, while it might be tempting to view Gal Dune as fitting the profile of antisocial personality disorder (also known as sociopathy), he does not fit the diagnostic criteria. Gal Dune is frequently remorseful and displays guilt and regret, as well as empathy. His love for his wife is demonstrated very clearly, and he has a drive to make decisions for the greater good of humanity, as well as helping and saving individual crew members, especially in Season 2. However, Gal Dune has most of the hallmarks of someone with schizotypal personality disorder, such as odd/inconsistent behavior, social anxiety, paranoia and distrust, and unusual beliefs, e.g. his conviction in Dorrynn's larger mission.

Equipment

 

Weapons

*Colt M16A3 rifle
*M9 pistol
*Screwdriver
*C-4

Other equipment

*Battle Dress Uniform
*Xanvoss environmental suit
*Radio
*Sunglasses
*Flashlight
*Long-range communication stone
*Canteen
*Order of ZorVex radio
*Binoculars

Vehicles

*Dorrynn
*Xanvoss shuttle

Relationships

Romances

*Gloria Gal Dune

*Amanda Perry