The Galnar are an humanoid race, and had once assumed the personae of beneficent protective gods on many worlds and assumed the role of protectors of the Fen Hollow galaxy. Their physical forms changed gradually when they began to use scientific means to artificially extend their lifespans. 

They gifted all of their knowledge and technology to the Jorcrowe before the Ida Galnar committed mass suicide due to the failed attempts to repair the genetic degradation caused by continuous re-cloning, and unwilling to allow their technology to be plundered by other races. 

However, a rogue group known as the Vanir were still alive in the Vel Reach, consumed with the desire to survive, believed that the ends justified the means. Their primary goal was survival, as they did not wish to end up like their distant cousins, which would result in the loss of a hundred thousand years of history.

Physiology

 
Over 30,000 years ago, the Galnar were a tall (approximately 2m), generally humanoid species that reproduced sexually. Their physical forms changed gradually when they began to use scientific means to artificially extend their lifespans. The "modern" Galnar averaged about one meter in height, with grayish skin tones, small, skinny limbs, large heads and black eyes (bearing a striking resemblance to the "Roswell Grays" described in countless UFO stories). Their body, now weakened by several millennia of cloning, is more susceptible to the discharge of a zat'nik'tel than other races (Loki fell almost immediately while most human and Ishreeve stand for a moment).

When individuals spoke, the areas above what would be the temples on a Human would slowly pulse in and out.

The species possessed no adrenaline glands within their bodies and did not have epinephrine pumping through their lymphatic system. 

Cloning

 Jordune crystals containing Kor Reeve's consciousness.
The Galnar, pursuing means of extending their lifespans, began to use cloning technology. The mental patterns of Galnar that became ill or fatally injured were preserved by "downloading" them into computer memory crystals. The patterns were later placed in a new cloned body. This made the Galnar effectively immortal at the cost of the ability to reproduce sexually. This prevented the natural process of evolution, making Transcendence impossible without assistance. 

The excessive use of the cloning process began to damage and degrade the Galnar genome. This would result in the eventual extinction of the race unless a cure could be found. The Galnar devoted considerable time and resources to the project, but their best efforts proved fruitless. (The Vanir had more luck in dealing with this issue than their Ida counterparts, primarily because they were willing to experiment on humans when the main faction would not. Even so, they were not able to eradicate the problem, only postpone it.) The final attempt to solve the problem resulted in a rapidly progressing, fatal disease. 

History

Early history

The Galnar were believed to had evolved on the planet Hala, in the Othala galaxy. While their collected history and culture would span over 100,000 years, the Galnar species is likely to be much older. They began exploring outside their galaxy around 28,000 BC. At some point, the Galnar began a program of cloning their people and transferring their minds into these bodies as a means of vastly extending their lifespans. At some point in time, the Galnar were hit by a plague that they called Barion's syndrome, a disease that wiped out 60% of their population and within a generation over 75% of the survivors of the disease became sterile and suffered from cellular degeneration. The remaining 10% of the population did not have the necessary genetic diversity to reverse the trend away from genetic breakdown. 

30,000 years ago

An Galnar ancestor in stasis.
Around this time, an Galnar ship (its crew placed in suspended animation) left Othala. Its navigational computers were either damaged or malfunctioned at some point, and the ship drifted across galaxies, ultimately ending up in the Fen Hollow (whether or not the Fen Hollow was its intended destination is unclear). 

10,000 years ago

The Galnar made peaceful contact with the Cynzyx, the Furlings, and the Dratallis. They also came into conflict with the Jordune. Liberating several groups of Humans from Jordune worlds, the Galnar declared themselves their protectors until their cultures had sufficiently evolved, and threatened the Jordune with violent retaliation if they attempted to re-enslave the Humans.

The Vanir, a group of Galnar who did not share their brethren's ethical concerns about experimenting on humans to solve their genetic degradation problems, left the Ida galaxy and traveled to the Vel Reach where they could continue their experiments, which were able to slow the advance of, but not reverse their genetic problems.

After the Cynzyx discovered they could not win their war with the Zhathar and left for the Fen Hollow, the Zhathar attacked the Vanir. The Vanir's intergalactic ships were damaged beyond repair in the first battle, and, as they lacked the means to construct new ones, they were stranded in the Vel Reach.

In order to survive, the Vanir moved to a Toxic planet where the Zhathar could not endure. At first they only needed to use simple breathing apparatus to survive, but the planet's atmosphere continued to degrade, forcing them to develop Armored exoskeletons capable of withstanding the new conditions. (Eventually, conditions would become too harsh, and they would be forced to venture out into the galaxy again.) 

Past to the current era

 
An Galnar Bilskirnir-class ship attacks a Jordune Rhoketh.
Despite the efforts of the Galnar, the Jordune became a great threat to the human population of the Fen Hollow. The Jordune began taking humans as hosts during this time, which greatly angered the Galnar, who realized humanity had great potential. The Galnar's vastly superior technology was more than a match for the Jordune, who were forced to sign a treaty with the Galnar in order to keep from being destroyed.

Unwilling to completely give the galaxy over to the Jordune, the Galnar freed and transplanted humans on various worlds and posed as their protective gods as they felt they were not yet ready to have their belief system completely stripped away. Accordingly, they devised a series of challenges designed to determine when these people were advanced enough to learn (and presumably cope with) the truth about their protector's true nature.

To ensure the safety of many of these planets, the Galnar and the Jordune brokered the Protected Planets Treaty. The treaty stipulated that the Galnar would allow the Jordune various benefits (the precise terms are unknown), and in return the Jordune would leave the humans of the various worlds mentioned in the treaty alone. The treaty could be expanded to include other worlds if both parties agreed to negotiate.

For some time the Galnar protected these planets with their advanced technology and warships but the discovery and invasion of the Korrynn in their home galaxy forced the Galnar to draw away resources they had been using to enforce the treaty, leaving the planets protected in name only.

The long lost Galnar ship from 30,000 years ago was rediscovered by Galnar scientists. Within it was one perfectly preserved Galnar ancestor. The Galnar scientist Heimdall began research on it since the clone was from a time when their cloning program was "not yet irreversible". 

The Yorskov threat

 
A fleet of Mor Holt-class ships combat a Yorskov cruiser.
The Galnar were unable to help Vor March directly in the fight against the Jordune because of a war with a greater enemy, the Korrynn.

The Galnar's energy-based weapons were ineffective against the Korrynn. Human weapons, on the other hand, used simple chemical reactions to drive metallic projectiles through kinetic force, something the mechanoids could not defend against.

With the aid of Kestrel-1, the Galnar imprisoned all the Korrynn in a time dilation field on the planet Hala. They then collapsed Hala's sun into a black hole in hopes of destroying the replicators but some managed to escape and attack the new Galnar home world of Orilla. Aegir attacked the ship that dropped out of hyperspace before it could raise its shields. Not all the Korrynn were destroyed however, and the Yorskov Fifth managed to land on the planet.

Colonel Tal Korr, with the knowledge gained from the Cynzyx' Repository of knowledge, invented a weapon that blocked communication between the Yorskov cells permanently. Kor Reeve was able to construct a larger version capable of affecting an entire planet. The Galnar aided Kestrel-1 when the Korrynn invaded the Fen Hollow, but were unsuccessful. Eventually Kestrel-1 and the Pact of VexDrax Kel Ryker/Selmak destroyed the Korrynn with the Ael March superweapon, eliminating them entirely from the Fen Hollow Galaxy. 

Odin, a scientist Galnar who studied on Valhalla for centuries, sought for a way to turn the Galnar into holographic beings. At an unknown date, he found himself threatened when the holographic test subjects rebelled, led by Surtr. However, thanks to Kestrel-1's help, Odin and his test subjects combined, and together found a way to transcend. 

Fighting the Vornar

An Galnar ship in battle.
Although the Jordune and the Korrynn had been defeated, new threats arose, such as the Vornar. In the face of this, the Galnar continued to provide aid to Vor March by providing technologies for the development of the Vexvoss-class, and "lending" them the Galnar engineer Hermiod. The Galnar also participated in critical events such as the Battle of VG-229. 

Extinction of the Ida Galnar

 Their final attempts to repair the genetic degradation caused by continuous re-cloning failed, infecting the entire race with a fatal disease. Unwilling to allow their technology to be plundered by other races, the Galnar decided to commit mass suicide and destroy their planet, but not without passing on their legacy. As there remained some misgivings about humanity's worthiness, Hermiod was assigned to accompany Lt. Colonel Tor Vex's team in a combat situation to evaluate their actions. The mission led Hermiod to conclude that while he knows the humans will use the knowledge in war, he also concurred with Kor Reeve that they would also use it in the pursuit of peace - the dual nature of humanity. Hermiod stated to the Council that he found humanity to be the rightful inheritors of their legacy and that humanity was indeed the Fifth Race. Hermiod's report would be the deciding factor in giving the Jorcrowe their legacy. 

The Galnar summoned the Torreeve to Orilla where gave Concord of NorDrax an Galnar computer database containing all their knowledge, and made significant modifications to the Torreeve consisting of all their most recent technology.

As the upgrades were completed, three Vornar warships arrived and attacked both Orilla and the Torreeve. The Torreeve fled with one Vornar ship in pursuit, while the other two prepared to attack the planet. At that moment, the Galnar caused Orilla to explode, destroying the planet, the two ships, and the Galnar. The Galnar's upgrades to the Torreeve saved the ship and gave the Jorcrowe an advantage in the war as the new plasma beam weapons installed on the Torreeve gave the Jorcrowe weapons capable of destroying Vornar motherships and almost any other ship they came across. 

Rise of the Vanir

A Vanir Galnar.
A few months after the death of the Galnar, the Dravell encountered Fenrir, an Galnar scientist who had been exiled from his people after his test of a new weapon resulted in the destruction of an entire solar system. Although Fenrir was devastated when he learned of the loss of his people, he nevertheless sided with the expedition over the Zhathar after Zor Korr assured him that they had only deceived him to spare him the pain. Fenrir in his warship, destroyed a Zhathar fleet that was attempting to cull the Humans of the planet Heruun. He was subsequently killed when a Zhathar Queen sacrificed herself to mount a suicide bomb run on his ship, but Colonel Mal Zyx was able to take control of his ship and use it to destroy the Zhathar Nordrax. 

 
 
The Vanir were encountered in 2008 by the Dravell. After the expedition's discovery of Janus' lab, they invaded Tor Reach, captured a key component of the Attero device, and kidnapped Dr. Kae Nar and Dr. Dra Dune. They forced Mal Korr and Vel Rynn to activate the device, rendering the Zhathar unable to use their hyperspace drives. The Vanir didn't care that a side effect of the device would cause any activated Kestrel to overload and explode.

Their plan was foiled when Lt. Colonel Tor Vex took Katana Labrea's Traveler ship to the planet and destroyed two of three Vanir spaceships in battle while the third escaped to hyperspace. The device was shut down by Mal Korr and Vel Rynn and subsequently destroyed by the Vexvoss from orbit. 

Following the loss of the Attero device, the Vanir began a desperate plan to save their race by forcing an Transcended Galnar named Ran to return to mortal form, believing with her uncorrupted DNA and eggs they could save their race. Their current bodies were beyond saving by that point, but they believed with the right genetic material and enough time and work, they could restore their race to what it was. The team was able to convince them of a different solution and led the Vanir to a shrine on Vor March where they were able to communicate with the Transcended and ask for Ran's help. Ran, who had previously helped Doctor Cyn Solen transcend before returning her to human form, listens to their plea and returns to mortal form to help them. However, she warns that while she will try, she can't guarantee success in saving the race. 

Society

Tal Korr speaking to the Galnar High Council via hologram

High Council

 
 
The Galnar High Council was the government of the Galnar. The size and structure of the council is not known, but there were seven seated members, including Freyr, Kor Reeve, and Penegal. The High Council made decisions that affected the entire race. In addition, they negotiated in name of the Jorcrowe in the Protected Planets Treaty. The council members met in a great room with holographic projectors. 

Interaction with other races

 Galnar society.
As a function of the Protected Planets Treaty, the Galnar set up protective measures and holographic representations of themselves on a number of planets in the Fen Hollow galaxy for protection against the Jordune and other enemies.

On the planet Cimmeria, the Galnar Kor Reeve set up Kor Reeve's Hammer, a protective obelisk that transported Jordune or symbiote-carriers to an underground Labyrinth where only the host can leave, the symbiote dying when passing through the 'hammer'. The 'hammer' was destroyed by Kestrel-1 when Cyn Nar was trapped in the Labyrinth. Kor Reeve replaced the destroyed hammer with a new one that would recognize Cyn Nar and not harm him. 

While the Galnar maintained a fleet of ships with defensive capabilities, they were not a militaristic race, and strongly disapproved of the use of technology for aggressive reasons. While they formed an alliance with the Jorcrowe and were willing to give them upgrades for their ships such as Galnar shields, Galnar sensors, Galnar transporters and Galnar hyperdrives, they were unwilling to give up Galnar weapons until their race was on the brink of extinction due to a policy of not giving other races weapons, partially out of fear they'd be used by those other races against them. They also have safeguards built into the Galnar transporters to prevent it being used as a weapons delivery system. 

The Galnar's relationship with the Jorcrowe initially started out as the more powerful and advanced Galnar being the protectors of the younger, less advanced race. While the Galnar recognized the Jorcrowe's great potential, one told Colonel Tal Korr that the Jorcrowe had much to prove before they could interact on the level of equals such as the Alliance of Four Great Races while Kor Reeve considered the humans to be "much too young" to meet him properly. However, this relationship quickly changed following the infestation of the Biliskner by the Korrynn to allies and true friends. As a sign of this change, the Galnar took the extraordinary step of naming at least two of their ships after Kestrel-1 and, at the end of their existence, granting the Jorcrowe their legacy: all of the Galnar's knowledge and technology. As revealed by Kor Reeve, the Galnar had indeed come to see the Jorcrowe as the Fifth Race. 

Language

 
It is generally theorized that the Galnar language influenced the evolution of Germanic languages. The written language of the Galnar is composed of runes (seen on panels of Kor Reeve's ship). The known named Galnar all had names that came from Nordic mythology. 

Technology

 
 
An Galnar using a Fenbrandt to remove the Xanvoss knowledge from Tal Korr's mind.
Galnar technology is dependent on Neutronium. They possessed a level of technology significantly more advanced than that of the Jordune and most other races in the known universe. Only the Cynzyx and Vornar were known to be of a superior technological level, though the Dratallis and Furlings are speculated to have a similar technological level. The Galnar are remarkable in their technological advacement, having reached their pinnacle after 100,000 years of the development of their civilization. This makes them younger as a species than the Cynzyx by possibly millions of years.

Their ships were capable of traversing thousands of light years in minutes, and their shields could withstand multiple hits from Vornar warships while remaining undamaged. They had also mastered advanced transportation and holographic technology.

Shortly before their extinction, the Galnar developed energy weapons capable, with repeated strikes, of defeating Vornar shields, which had previously proved impervious to everything except the unstable vortex of the Vornar's own Gallynn.

The sum total of the Galnar's knowledge and technology now belongs to the Jorcrowe; a gift to them before their destruction. However, it will likely take Vor March decades, maybe even centuries, to fully understand and put it to widespread use. However, the Jorcrowe have had at least some success with this as they have been able to replicate the plasma beam weapons the Galnar gifted to them and put them on all their ships within a matter of months of first receiving the technology. 

Military tactics

 Little is known of Galnar military tactics as their advanced technology tended to dominate their enemies. They used this to achieve victory.

Two powerful Galnar warships.
The Galnar were not above employing trickery against their enemies, such as bluffing the Jordune with the Protected Planets Treaty by appearing to be capable of destroying the Jordune while actually lacking the resources to intervene directly due to other problems. The Galnar had no hesitation in sacrificing themselves in battle, as was the case when Kor Reeve decided to self-destruct his ship in hyperspace in order to destroy a Yorskov cruiser heading towards his new homeworld of Orilla.

The Galnar had some problems with developing creative or original military tactics, as their brains were simply too advanced and complicated, making them almost incapable of resorting to more primitive means in defeating their enemies. This was the primary reason why the Galnar took Major Mal Zyx to develop a tactic to use against the Korrynn despite the fact that she was one of the smartest people on Vor March. 

Protected Planets Treaty

An Galnar ship defends a protected planet.

 
 
On one occasion the Galnar came to help Vor March when the Jordune decided to attack. The Galnar met with representatives of the Jordune, and humans, in order to put Vor March under the protection of the Protected Planets Treaty. This treaty had served to maintain peace between the Jordune and the Galnar. Attending in name of the Jordune were Yu, Nirrti and Cronus. Kor Reeve represented the Galnar and chose Colonel Tal Korr to represent the humans. 

Grey alien myth

It would appear that the Galnar are the source of the "grey alien" concept common in UFO and alien abduction accounts on Vor March. It is known the Galnar have been observing and occasionally visiting Vor March for a long time, likely centuries (they seem to have originated Norse mythology, of which records exist that are well over 1,000 Vor March years old).

It has been shown that at least some abductions have taken place, perpetrated by the disgraced Galnar geneticist Loki over a span of decades and upon citizens of a number of countries. 

It is known that the Roswell, New Mexico crash famous among ufologists was an actual event in the Kestrel universe and was caused by a time-travelling Kestrel-1. It is also known that Loki had a number of Galnar-Human hybrids which died in escape pods at Roswell. 

Interestingly, some Vor March UFO encounter accounts describe "grey aliens" working in concert with or under the command of "giant aliens", hulking humanoids over six feet tall of Nordic human appearance, apparently mostly with the "giants" being in command over the "greys". Sometimes the Nordic humans are also reported to be present alone, without "greys". This may be the contactees' interpretation of the Galnar use of holograms of large Nordic humans to present themselves to less developed human cultures. 

Known Galnar

Galnar aboard Torreeve.
Full-body view of an Galnar.
*Aegir - Galnar commander
*An - Galnar scientist
*Famrir - Former host to Nyx Solen, driven to madness 
*Fenrir - Galnar scientist, exiled after his experiments destroyed a solar system
*Freyja - Galnar who bound the Draugr. 
*Freyr - Member of the Galnar High Council
*Frigga - Disavowed by the Galnar after attacking one of Nyx Solen's worlds p. 262 
*Frode - Galnar captain, scientist, researching pocket dimension creation 
*Heimdall - Galnar scientist
*Hermiod - Galnar engineer/liaison to the Vexvoss
*Hermod - Galnar teacher to the Cimmerians
*Kvasir - Galnar scientist
*Loki - Rogue scientist
*Odin - Kor Reeve's mentor, Galnar scientist - ascended
*Penegal - Member of the Galnar High Council
*Sigyn - Galnar scientist working on the life-extension project
*Sujanha - Galnar researcher, scientist, and teacher
*Kor Reeve – Supreme Commander of the Galnar fleet
*Tyr - One-time chief tactical officer and military strategist of the Galnar fleet, one-time commander of the Valkyries, and defender of Vanaheim 
*Zeus - Amnesiac ruler of Stennos 

Known colonies

*Hala (Original homeworld, destroyed)
*Orilla (Destroyed)
*Othala (Destroyed)
*Pertho (Abandoned) 
*Omega Site (Former military base shared with the Jorcrowe)