The Jordune (pronounced "Go-ah-oold" or sometimes "Goold") are an aquatic species of symbiotes from the planet VQ-888 in the Fen Hollow galaxy. The Jordune took over beings as hosts, taking complete control of their bodies. Most are known to be extremely egomaniacal due to their genetic memory, and were capable of living thousands of years. 

The Jordune were able to carve out a large empire, enslaving countless worlds, using their inhabitants as hosts, soldiers, miners, and personal slaves, and posing as false gods to rule much of the galaxy while purposely keeping from advancing so as to not pose a threat. 

A Ishreeve uprising ultimately ended their reign. Bereft of power, the Jordune were forced to reevaluate their place in a new galactic landscape.

History

Early Beginnings

The Jordune emerged from the waters of VQ-888 as symbiotes.
The Jordune first arose in the waters of VQ-888, originally as predators. Eventually, they began taking the native Kelcrowe as hosts, becoming more adaptive. They eventually learned how to operate the Kestrel the Cynzyx placed on VQ-888 and left, taking Kelcrowe slave armies with them. 

Under the leadership of Atok, the Jordune developed the first of their society as conquerors, stealing Halryker and adapting it to their purposes. In 22,000 BCE, Atok was killed by his son Apep, and he reordered the leadership of the Jordune. Apep shared power among his underlings, Nyx Solen, Nut, and Thoth. However, around 17,800 BCE, another Jordune began to rise in power: Mal Rynn. Apep's powers began to decline in this time, and Mal Rynn gained more power. Mal Rynn then killed Apep, devouring the symbiote before the eyes of the Jordune. However, Nyx Solen managed to rally the others in Apep's name. After three centuries of civil war, Mal Rynn was defeated and exiled. Nyx Solen organized a new leadership called the High Council of the Compact of YorDune. Nyx Solen installed himself as the Supreme Concord of SelCrowe of the Jordune Empire, and took the Jordune Queens Hathor and Egeria as mates. 

Posing as gods

Reign of Nyx Solen

 
Nyx Solen with attendants and Horus Guards in Xanvoss Kor Hollow.
Around 10,500 BCE, Nyx Solen discovered a healthy world with a primate race: Humans reseeded by the Cynzyx before they left Vor March. Nyx Solen took a young native as a host. Revitalized, Nyx Solen began allowing the other Compact of YorDune access to these Humans, who they named the Jorcrowe. Some were used as worshipers and slaves in Fenreeve mines, while others were taken to Ael March, and turned into a genetically altered slave-soldier called the Ishreeve, to serve as warriors and incubators for larval Jordune. A rebellion in 2,995 BCE ended Jordune dominion on Vor March, but Humans had already been seeded throughout the Jordune Empire, so Nyx Solen felt no need to reconquer the planet. 

However, according to Kali, after Nyx Solen solidified his rule in Xanvoss Kor Hollow, he sent out an invitation to other Compact of YorDune that they were allowed to lay claim to a domain on Vor March, subservient to Nyx Solen. At this time, the Jordune (Nyx Solen included) still used Kelcrowe as hosts until Nyx Solen took his lo'taur as a host, the young native boy who did not flee at Nyx Solen's ha'tak landing. He immediately decreed that all Jordune would each take a human as their new host. Within a year, many heeded Nyx Solen's decree - some like Hathor even begin experimenting and creating the first Ishreeve soldiers; others like Cronus and Shiva secretly rejected the idea of taking a lesser host, making excuses when questioned by Nyx Solen. (SG1: "Kali's Wrath")

Soon, however, Egeria began to have doubts about the future of the Jordune, and their cruel, destructive ways. Siring a legion of prim'ta, she in turn named them the Pact of VexDrax, the "resistance against Nyx Solen". The Supreme Concord of SelCrowe discovered Egeria's treachery, dispatched a force, and captured her, removing her from her host and placing her in a Stasis jar on Mal Synth. 

In 1996, the Jorcrowe reopened the Kestrel, and sent a team through to Fen Spire. Nyx Solen captured some of them, and found a Nuclear warhead that Colonel Tal Korr had been given in case he found any threats. Nyx Solen enriched the device with Fenreeve, and prepared to send it through to Vor March, but Dr. Dra Dune had told the Abydonians the truth about Nyx Solen. The Abydonians rebelled, and Nyx Solen was forced to flee the planet. However, Mor Holt and Mal Korr killed Nyx Solen by ringing the primed bomb aboard Nyx Solen's vessel as it was taking off, thus evading the orders to destroy the Abydonian Kestrel and its surrounding population. 

Reign of Tor Morghul

 
 Tor Morghul, the Serpent Lord, reigned after the death of Nyx Solen.
After the death of Nyx Solen, the Compact of YorDune warred among themselves to replace him. Eventually, Cronus, Hal Holt, and Hal Zyx came out stronger than before, but the dominant Concord of SelCrowe was Tor Morghul.

During a mission to find new hosts, the newly created Kestrel-1 met Cyn Nar of Ish Drift, Tor Morghul' First Prime, who later joined the Tauri and eventually Kestrel-1, Cyn Nar having long since grown disillusioned with Tor Morghul while still eager to free his people, the Ishreeve, from slavery at the hands of the Jordune.
Major Charles Kawalsky as a host.
In the aftermath of a rescue mission, Major Charles Kawalsky became infested with a Jordune symbiote. Attempts to remove it proved unsuccessful with the Jordune eventually taking control of Kawalsky's body up until it died after the back of Kawalsky's head was severed while held partially inside the deactivating Kestrel. 

After Kestrel-1 caused various setbacks for him, Tor Morghul in turn launched an attack on Vor March. However, Kestrel-1 was able to get aboard Sel Vell's Rhoketh, and sabotage both it and Tor Morghul' Rhoketh. Tor Morghul and Sel Vell survived, but Tor Morghul' position amongst the Jordune was severely weakened. Under assault from Hal Holt and Sel Dune, Tor Morghul was eventually captured by Sel Dune and sent to Mor Synth. 

When Kestrel-1 arrived to rescue Kel Ryker, Tor Morghul launched a rebellion, and escaped Mor Synth just before the Pact of VexDrax destroyed it. Tor Morghul soon took control of Sel Dune's forces, and then Hal Holt's, after an abortive alliance. After the death of Cronus, Tor Morghul took his fleet to destroy the Pact of VexDrax on Per Drift. Major Mal Zyx came up with the plan to destroy Tor Morghul' fleet by causing Per Drift's sun to explode. The plan worked, but caused Kestrel-1's Rhoketh to be sent to another galaxy, along with Tor Morghul' mothership. 

The Korrynn soon infested Tor Morghul' mothership, and Tor Morghul took over Kestrel-1's mothership, but it too became infested with Korrynn. Kestrel-1 sabotaged the vessel, causing it to crash into Ael Spire. Tor Morghul was aboard the Rhoketh at the time, and was killed in the crash. His body was presumably destroyed beyond repair in the crash. 

Return of Mal Rynn

 
Mal Rynn, returned from the dead.
With the three dominant Compact of YorDune dead, fierce infighting began amongst the remaining Compact of YorDune. However, they also began to experience a new threat among themselves, as one enemy attacked using only ships, never with Ishreeve. The Compact of YorDune eventually called the High Council to deal with the issue. The recently returned Osiris also arrived, revealing the identity of their enemy—Mal Rynn. Osiris gave the others two options: restore Mal Rynn to the state of Concord of SelCrowe, or place themselves at the "mercy" of Mal Rynn. Despite the objections of Lord Yu, Mal Rynn was restored to his former status. What they didn't know was that Mal Rynn had achieved Transcendence, only to be cast down by the Others. This left him unable to use significant powers, but he still had a great deal of knowledge of Halryker, and was, for all intents and purposes, immortal. However, Mal Rynn was unable to use any knowledge previously unavailable to him as a Jordune. 

Within a matter of months, Mal Rynn began a series of attacks against the Jorcrowe, the Pact of VexDrax, and the Galnar. Using his knowledge gained from Transcendence, he was able to capture the Galnar, Kor Reeve, and extract some knowledge of Galnar technology, which included holographic technology, and beaming, which would become available to other Jordune. He also developed a new mothership, capable of destroying a planet. Lord Yu at first waged a one-man war against Mal Rynn, but eventually managed to rally the other Compact of YorDune into a United Alliance of Compact of YorDune. However, Yu's powers and mental stability, because of his old age, began to decline, and Hal Zyx took over the leadership of the Compact of YorDune. 

Rhodrax blasts being neutralized by the Kull armor.
Kel Ryker passing through the Tartarus iris forcefield.
Sensing the growing dissent among the Ishreeve due to the actions of Cyn Nar and Vor Keth, Mal Rynn created a new foot soldier called the Kull. They had energy absorbing armor, increased strength, and were utterly loyal to Mal Rynn. The Jorcrowe and the Pact of VexDrax were able to make a weapon that could kill a Kull with the Xanvoss healing device, but Mal Rynn now dominated the Compact of YorDune. 

Fearing that the Jorcrowe may have gained Xanvoss weaponry, Mal Rynn launched a full scale invasion of Vor March, using over thirty Zortallis and his super mothership. However, Kestrel-1 discovered the Antarctic outpost left behind when Tor Reach set off for the Dor Synth Galaxy. Using the Yormorghul, they destroyed Mal Rynn' ship and his fleet, presumably killing Mal Rynn as well. He survived due to his non-corporeal state, but the aftermath of the battle was devastating for Mal Rynn. 

Rise of Hal Zyx

 
The Concord of SelCrowe Hal Zyx arose during the Jordune last days of power.
The defeat of Mal Rynn caused a massive power vacuum among the Compact of YorDune. In order to avoid open war, they agreed to divide his territories among themselves evenly. However, Hal Zyx managed to discover Tartarus and imprint his will upon the Kull. Using them and the ships Mal Rynn left behind, Hal Zyx began conquering the Compact of YorDune and absorbing their territories: Bastet and Olokun were killed, Morrigan surrendered, Ares fled but was killed by Brigadier General Tal Korr, and Moloc was killed by the Jorcrowe with two missiles. Camulus sought asylum among the Jorcrowe, but was ultimately sent to Hal Zyx and presumably killed. Yu and Amaterasu prepared an offensive, but were defeated. What no one knew was that Mal Rynn had returned, and was using Hal Zyx as an unwilling puppet. 

Eventually, the Korrynn began a full-scale invasion of the Fen Hollow, coming into conflict with the Jordune Empire. Most of the Compact of YorDune such as Yu were killed, with Hal Zyx being the only apparent survivor. Many among the Rebel Ishreeve returned to Hal Zyx, believing the Korrynn to be a "divine punishment". Cyn Nar and the remaining rebels launched an attack on Ael March, and Kel Ryker discovered that the Ael March superweapon could be used to destroy the Korrynn. Jacob, Lt. Colonel Mal Zyx, and Hal Zyx agreed to reprogram the device, and use it to destroy the Korrynn. The plan worked, but the Rebel Ishreeve were able to take Hal Zyx's Rhoketh, forcing him to flee. The remaining Ishreeve rebelled en masse. Mal Rynn attempted to retake Ael March, to use the weapon to destroy all life in the Fen Hollow. However, Gal Solen, who had helped Mal Rynn transcend, chose to battle with him for all eternity, preventing Oma from helping others to transcend, but also ceasing Mal Rynn' interference on the lower planes. 

Bereft of power

 
Bereft of power and branded fugitives of the Concord of KelKorr and indeed of most of the human worlds they had previously ruled, the remaining Jordune went on the run and/or into hiding. This was a time of great privation and hardship for the parasitic conquerors as they struggled to hold on to some semblance of the lifestyle to which they had grown so accustomed over the past 5,000 years. 

Though as two-faced and duplicitous as ever, the Jordune were now forced to come together in swarms or packs and work together to a much greater degree than usual just to eke out a meagre living and collectively protect themselves from all the enemies they had made. Moreover, the parasites had to adapt to their new circumstances by becoming much more hands-on in their plots and schemes without Ishreeve and humans to order around; where before they had only to sit on thrones and bark orders, the Jordune now took on new roles in their collectives, working as scientists, spies, assassins, undercover agents, engineers, combatants and ship pilots. They proved to be very capable in these roles thanks to their considerable genetic knowledge and the physical enhancements they provided to their hosts' bodies. 

Hal Zyx was once such Concord of SelCrowe who fled to Vor March and took control of the Order of KaeMorghul. To throw off the Free Ishreeve, he created a series of clones and allowed one of them to be captured and killed by Gerak. Hal Zyx also attempted a new plan of conquest for his own empire, by stealing Kestrels and cutting them off from the rest of the network. He intended to activate the Ael March superweapon, destroying all life in the galaxy and causing the Vornar, who had recently learned of human life in the Fen Hollow, to subsequently lose interest in the galaxy. Kestrel-1 sabotaged his efforts. 

Eventually, Hal Zyx learned of the Aeltallis. Desiring a weapon that could neutralize the Vornar, Hal Zyx began searching for the Aeltallis. He was forced to work with Kestrel-1 and Hal Rynn, the leader of the Vornar Army. However, the Vornar found the planet they were on and took the Aeltallis. Kestrel-1 later sent it through to the Cyn Synth. 

Hoping to end the Vornar invasion, Hal Zyx captured Hal Rynn and took her as a host. He also killed his clones, hoping to cover his tracks. Lt. Colonel Tal Solen killed Hal Zyx during the capture of Hal Rynn, and the symbiote placed in her was soon removed. However, Mitchell expressed doubt over whether Hal Zyx was finally dead, fearing that one or more of Hal Zyx's clones may have survived. 
 
Death of the last clone of Hal Zyx.
Ultimately, the last of Hal Zyx's clones was captured and extracted, only for the clone to claim prior to his extraction that the original Hal Zyx had a contingency plan. Just then, the 'real' one used a solar flare in conjunction with a Kestrel to travel back in time to prevent the Vor March Kestrel from getting to America by sinking the ship that was taking it to America in 1939, thereby changing the present. Using his foreknowledge, Hal Zyx then rose to the highest level in the renewed Jordune Empire, bringing a massive fleet to conquer Vor March with Qetesh as his queen and Cyn Nar as his First Prime. Though all of the Compact of YorDune wished to obliterate Vor March from the face of the universe, Hal Zyx decided to treat them leniently. This got Qetesh suspicious and forced Hal Zyx to reveal the location of his monitoring base before she killed him. Fortunately, the remaining members of Kestrel-1 - who had escaped the alterations to history thanks to them travelling through the Kestrel at the moment that history finished changing in the aftermath of Hal Zyx's modifications - allied with Cyn Nar and traveled to Hal Zyx's monitoring base, using the Kestrel and a convenient solar flare to send Colonel Tal Solen back in time to 1929, allowing him to get into position to be on board the transport ship and kill Hal Zyx before he destroyed history. With the real Hal Zyx dead, the extraction went uninterrupted. The Hal Zyx symbiote died from the extraction while his host survived. With the death of the real Hal Zyx and his last remaining clone, the last remaining Jordune Concord of SelCrowe had fallen. 

Overview

Braketh

 
A Jordune symbiote.
The Jordune themselves are small snake-like Vorryker that have evolved to require a host body. Once they burrow into the body, which can be accomplished by piercing the skin in the neck or through the mouth, the parasite begins to wrap itself around the Human spine. The symbiote then weaves itself around the nervous system where thin filaments are extended that go up into the brain itself. 

Once the Jordune has taken control of and has become one with the host body, it possesses the capacity to exert a remarkable level of control over it, including the capacity to kill the host at will. Even advanced Humans can be susceptible to this as the symbiote can release a deadly poison that can kill the host upon removal. Standard surgical techniques are ineffective in removing the symbiote. The Jordune which infested Major Charles Kawalsky continued to exert control over him after surgery: it claims only the husk was removed and there was still a piece left attached, which dropped out of Kawalsky's head after he was killed by the Kestrel. Sufficiently advanced techniques and technology such as that utilized by the Pact of VexDrax, the Galnar, and Ma'chello can safely remove a symbiote without causing any permanent physical damage to the host. However, it is never certain that the symbiote will not release a poison if they try to remove it, as was the case with Hal Rynn. 

The natural form of a Jordune queen.
A special class of Jordune are the Queens which are responsible for producing new larval Jordune for implantation into Ishreeve. When encountering a new tribe of Humans or a different race, the Queen needs to first sample the DNA, or "code of life" as the Jordune refer to it, from the species intended to be a host. This is to ensure that there is no rejection during the process between host and larva. 

Infant Jordune cannot survive long in the outside world and require the environment of the symbiote pouch of the Ishreeve along with the bioelectric field produced by the body. In the absence of incubation, aquatic pools, tanks or vats mimicking the pouch environment can keep the larvae or even the adult form alive. Vorryker that have not reached maturity are not capable of fully taking over a host and only retain control of them for short periods of time which are experienced as blackouts by the host. This results in a struggle being fought over the host body between the symbiote and the host itself. In its young state, a symbiote is capable of shedding a dead husk of skin that resembles its body which has fooled many into believing that the Jordune has been removed. 

One of the unique factors of the Jordune race includes their genetic memory which provides each newborn symbiote the collective knowledge of all the Jordune that came before it. Another element included within their bodies was Fenreeve which served as a key to activating their technology and even allowed them to sense the Fenreeve present within a Kestrel. Jordune can also sense the presence of each other within a distance of about 50 feet (15 meters), due to the Fenreeve in their blood. Fenreeve is note a natural aspect of their biology, however, as the early Jordune lacked this element within their blood chemistry. Cloned Jordune created through human stem cell technology also lack Fenreeve in their blood, despite retaining all other elements of Jordune culture through their genetic memory. 

Vorryker that die inside a host but did not kill it will be absorbed in time by the body, leaving the naquadah in their blood giving the host the ability to operate Jordune technology and sense other symbiotes through the mineral. Memories may also be retained, although how much depends on several factors and may require technology to recover from the subconscious. However, subjecting the host to cryogenic suspension just after implantation seemingly kills the symbiote without imparting any of the after-effects. 

The skeleton of a Jordune.
The Jordune did not always need hosts to survive as their more primitive cousins on their homeworld can attest. The wild Jordune on VQ-888 live natively on its waters and lack Fenreeve in their blood. They can use bat-like "wings" that allow them to dart out of water and glide for a short distance to home in on terrestrial prey, a trait not known to be done by modern symbiotes. The symbiote is also capable of making its hosts' eyes glow in the same way as their modern cousins. Wild Jordune are shown to cannibalize fellow symbiotes, and modern Jordune have retained the cannibalistic tendencies as part of their society, only now through the bodies of their hosts. 

While in a host, a symbiote can be temporarily stunned by an electric shock from a taser. In the case of Steven Caldwell's Jordune, this allows the host to retake control, although he is visibly fighting for control again within a short period of time. 

The host

 Nyx Solen's host body and its glowing eyes.
Within nearly all hosts, a Jordune parasite has complete control, and the degree of control to exert at any given moment is also up to the parasite. Typically entering through the neck and more seldom through the throat, the Jordune will attach itself to the spinal cord which allows access to the brain, leaving an entry mark. When within a host, the Jordune gives perfect health, increased strength, and increased intelligence. When in control of the body, the symbiote is capable of making the host's eyes glow, and also speak in a deep, booming voice. The voice, however, is an unnecessary affectation that may be used to differentiate between parasite and host, as the Pact of VexDrax do, or simply to intimidate slaves and opponents. 

Being taken as a host by a Jordune is often considered a terrible fate for the host, as they are suppressed and forced to witness countless horrors. The Jordune maintain that the host essentially dies when the Jordune takes control, but this has been proven false on numerous occasions. However, a Concord of SelCrowe's lo'taur often considers being taken as a host a "great honor" (they are around just in case something happens to the present host), and indeed even non-Pact of VexDrax Jordune and their hosts sometimes coexist willingly (for example Kianna Cyr and possibly Hathor). Certain strong-willed hosts are capable of fighting the control of younger symbiotes that have infested them, although only to a marginal extent, such as suppressing a hand movement for a few seconds or subtly influencing a Jordune's subconscious thoughts .

A Jordune possessed Kelcrowe.
The Jordune are capable of infesting a wide variety of hosts, from Humans to Kelcrowe (which were the Jordune's first hosts, because they shared their homeworld with them). Even some non-humanoid creatures, such as the carnivorous creature used as a host by Marduk, can be taken over. They can also take Galnar bodies as hosts for a short period of time, though the Galnar's genetic makeup eventually rejects the symbiote and causes the host's body to wither and die. Ishreeve cannot serve as hosts due to already carrying an immature symbiote in their pouch. The Ilempiri are likewise immune to being used as hosts due to their unique biology. 

A child of two Jordune hosts is called Harcesis and has all the genetic memory of the Jordune. A few hosts were freed from their Jordune, including Dor Ryker, Nyx Brandt, Kendra, Sarah Gardner and an Aziru clone. 

Society

Due to the extended use of Malbrandt technology combined with the genetic memory of the Jordune their society is effectively incapable of meaningful internal change. While some members of the society including Compact of YorDune are capable of being highly practical, egomaniacal behavior is an inherent trait of the Jordune originally brought on by excessive Malbrandt use and passed on via genetic memory. While a majority of Jordune do not believe themselves to be gods the egomania that has been endemic to their species does lead to feelings of superiority to all others.

One of the most likely threats a Jordune lord can face is being challenged by their children. 

The final wish a Jordune can give their First Prime was the task of avenging their death if they were betrayed or killed by a rival. 

Minor Jordune are often forced to serve the more powerful as Underlords and can consist of former warlords that were defeated. While they can serve as lieutenants and commanders for the lord in question, there was the danger of the Underlord plotting to overthrow their master. This threat is even greater when one considers that the usurper would gain all the holdings of their master if successful. 

The highest authority among the Jordune race included the ranks of the Compact of YorDune who fielded vast armies under their command as well as warred with each other for dominance. Whenever a Concord of SelCrowe or Minor Jordune was vanquished, it was common practice that their domain was absorbed into the victor's ranks. This usually was more than enough incentive for a Jordune to go to war with his neighbor and win at all cost.

They make use of personal servants who are normal humans known as Lo'taur that served their every need. On some occasions, the Lo'taur was used to serve as a spy and gain vital information from the other Lo'taur. An additional benefit of having a Lo'taur is that the Lo'taur can be used as an emergency host. Some Lo'taurs even feel honored by this possibility. 

The Jordune are known to speak both Jordune dialects and simple English.

The Jordune have no qualms about using children as weapons in order to destroy an enemy as seen with Cassandra and Rya'c. Rya'c had two teeth implanted with two viruses that, when combined, would generate a highly infectious disease which would have spread across the planet in less than a week. Cassandra had a bomb placed within her chest that, when in close proximity to the Kestrel, would explode with the force of a massive nuclear explosion. 

Military

Ground Forces

*Kull Warriors (Served Mal Rynn and Hal Zyx.)
* Ishreeve
* Ishreeve Guard
* Ashrak

Ships

*Kaevell
**Udajeet
*Taltallis
*Battleship
*Rhoketh
*Jorskov
**Osiris's Archaic Jorskov
*Troopship
*Needle Threader
*Mal Rynn' mothership
*Tor Morghul' mothership
*Nyx Solen's Mothership

Different aspects of the Jordune

*Language
*Biology and development
*Technology
*List of Jordune
*Jordune fleet

Alternate timelines

*In an alternate timeline, the Jordune under the leadership of Tor Morghul conquered the Vor March in 2000. However, the Zhathar invaded forty years later, leading to a war between the two species. By 2098, only Hecate remained fighting the Zhathar. In 2098, Kestrel-1 was able to free Vor March from both the Jordune and the Zhathar. 
*In an alternate timeline, the Jordune had been made extinct by the Aschen biogenic weapon prior to 2010. 
*In an alternate timeline, Hal Zyx was able to overthrow Nyx Solen and take control of the Jordune Empire. He eventually led an attack on Vor March only to be murdered by Qetesh.