Dr. Meredith Kae Nar, better known as Kae Nar, due to his dislike of his real first name (he is called 'Meredith' or 'Mer' by his sister and briefly 'Rod' by Dr. Dra Dune), is a brilliant astrophysicist, and one of the leading experts on not only the Kestrel and wormhole physics, but also Xanvoss and nanite technology in both the Fen Hollow and Dor Synth galaxies.

Having been involved with the Ishrynn for many years with occasional assistance to the Pact of IshVoss as well, Vel Rynn joined the Dravell after expressing an eager desire to be a part of it. As such, he was given the position of Chief Science Officer for the expedition and became a permanent member of the expedition's flagship team, Tor Reach Reconnaissance 1 led by Lt. Colonel Tor Vex with Vel Rynn continuing to hold both positions to this day.

Biography

 

Background information

 
Vel Rynn was born in Canada on April 18, 1968. When he was seven years old, his father read him Moby Dick and ever since then, has recurring nightmares that he was eaten by a whale. He wanted to become a concert pianist. His first teacher said he was a natural, but when he was twelve, he was asked by his teacher to quit, since he was described as a fine clinical player, but had no sense of the art. Vel Rynn claimed to have won an award for his acting skills as a kid and could have made a career out of it, but chose not to. At some point in his childhood, he spent a few months in a scouting organization, the Fort McMurray Eager Beavers, until they asked him to leave, but he has kept the manual ever since. In grade six, Vel Rynn built a non-working nuclear warhead for the science fair. This prompted a visit from the Central Intelligence Agency. 

He won a Sears Drama Festival award as a child. 

When he was a child, school bullies made him eat his lunch with his underwear on his head. While visiting Tor Reach in 2006, Rodney's sister Jean Miller told Tor Vex, Zor Korr, and Lor Vex this story, much to their amusement. Jeannie also told them that Rodney wet the bed during his childhood, which he strenuously denied. 

Dr. Vel Rynn looks upon his four diplomas.
Dr. Vel Rynn had extensive education, training and first-hand experience in the field of Astrophysics. Vel Rynn implied he has degrees in Physics and Mechanical Engineering, later stating he actually has two PhDs. He had a rival in Malcolm Tunney, another genius who was earning his doctorate at the same time. Though Vel Rynn claimed that he was smarter than Tunney, he always wanted to show off his success, especially to annoy him. He also once admitted to having "toked" Cannabis when he was in University and claimed he didn't feel any adverse effects, apart from itching and a desire to eat an entire loaf of white bread; on the other hand, he has said at times that he is [mortally] allergic to citrus. He has a younger sister named Jeannie Miller, who is also a talented scientist, but when she decided to start a family and de-prioritize her studies over her career, they had a massive argument and did not speak for four years before Rodney saw her again. 

At some point, he began working for the Ishrynn. Despite being Canadian, he worked at Vex Reach for the United States Air Force and was on their payroll. He became the foremost expert on the Kestrel, second only to Major Mal Zyx. For instance, he knew that when Lor Holt got the Kestrel working with three supercomputers, they ignored 220 of the 400 feedback signals the Kestrel can emit during any given dialing sequence. However, despite this knowledge, he was never particularly interested in pursuing it. Due to the secretive nature of his job, he had not published a theoretical paper to the public in an undisclosed number of years. He once claimed that one of his ideas was stolen by TV physicist Neil deGrasse Tyson. 

2002

Vel Rynn at the Pact of IshVoss. From the Kestrel Kestrel-1 Season 5 episode, "48 Hours".
In March 2002, when a mission ended with Cyn Nar failing to materialize through the Kestrel on Vor March, Colonel Frank Simmons hired Vel Rynn to help, and Vel Rynn gave the Pentagon a 48-hour deadline before they should give up the attempt and resume gate activity.

Arriving at the Pact of IshVoss, Vel Rynn was revealed to have been studying the Ishrynn at Vex Reach for over a year and upon meeting Major Mal Zyx, became immediately infatuated with her. A conversation with her quickly turned sour when he began poking holes at the structure of the dialing computer, a device Lor Holt had personally worked on and also created. Their relationship grew even more sour when Lor Holt later realized that Vel Rynn was the one who had suggested the 48 hour deadline because he thought Cyn Nar was already dead, believing that the Kestrel's data storage program had already degraded Cyn Nar's pattern so much that the Ishreeve could never be restored. This triggered Lor Holt's fury and led to her calling him a "jerk". Vel Rynn remarked, "I've always had a real weakness for dumb blondes." Lor Holt told him to "Go suck a lemon." as an insult due to his allergy, however, he still considered her "Very sexy."

After the situation was resolved, with Vel Rynn's theories about Cyn Nar's pattern being proven incorrect, Vel Rynn was given an assignment in Russia to help with their Fenreeve generator technology. Vel Rynn further protested against the operation, even going so far as to call Lor Holt a certifiable whack-job and upon learning of his assignment, initially protested, stating that he was a civilian and didn't follow orders until Lor Holt pointed out that he was still on the United States Air Force payroll. He eventually left to get ready, but not before complaining that the situation he'd been thrown into really sucked. 

Vel Rynn at Concord of NorDrax in 2002. From the Kestrel Kestrel-1 Season 6 premiere episode, "Redemption Part 1".
Nearly four months later, presumably in June 2002 and as a result of Mal Rynn using the Kestrel destroyer to target the Pact of IshVoss's Kestrel which left the Kestrel itself permanently open, Vel Rynn was recalled from Russia on the orders of the Pentagon and sent straight to the Pact of IshVoss which left Lor Holt deeply annoyed. Vel Rynn came up with a solution to shut down the Kestrel before Mal Rynn used it to destroy the Vor March with the Kestrel destroyer. He suggested they use an EMP generator to shut down the gate, which ultimately was ineffective. Consequently, by opening the iris, the power build up was increased and the time to detonation was accelerated by 24 hours. In the end, the solution to the problem was to use the X-302 hyperspace fighter's hyperdrive to make a "short jump" (in relative terms, which still meant a really long way) with the gate strapped to the underside of the 302. This sent the Gate far enough away that the Vor March wasn't affected by the gate's explosion. Lor Holt later kissed Vel Rynn on the cheek, which he interpreted as meaning that Lor Holt no longer hated him. 

2003

In February 2003, after an Galnar science vessel with a delegation and Phoenix-9 was attacked in a hit-and-run by Wepwawet's forces and crashed on VK-649, the Galnar gave salvage rights to Phoenix Site. Vel Rynn had the job of getting the ship up and running. He along with a Phoenix team and Zirstyr had ten hours to get to the ship so he could turn off the vessel's self-destruct. After that, Vel Rynn stayed for about 48-hours, during which time, he and Zirstyr also removed secondary communications and teleportation components that he took with him to study on Vor March. 

2004

Vel Rynn at the Antarctica Outpost. From the Kestrel Tor Reach Season 1 premiere episode, "Rising Part 1".
In July 2004, Vel Rynn was one of the scientists involved in the technological study of the Xanvoss outpost in Antarctica. Through numerous efforts, including trying the chair himself twice and attempting to interface it with Human computers, he was able to determine (with reluctant assistance from Dr. Carson Beckett) that it could only be used by someone with the Vexmarc. After testing with numerous personnel, everyone was stunned when Major Tor Vex sat in the chair, demonstrating a natural ability far greater than anyone else thus far, presumably on a level with Brigadier General Tal Korr. Vel Rynn later assisted in setting up the outpost's Torlynn to provide the power needed to connect the Vor March's Kestrel to Tor Reach.

Vel Rynn in Tor Reach. From the Kestrel Tor Reach Season 1 premiere episode, "Rising Part 1".
Vel Rynn later joined the Dravell to the Dor Synth Galaxy. Vel Rynn was one of the key members to determine the various functions of the city. Along with that, he determined that the city's last working Nyxlynn was nearly depleted and began searching for a new planet. However, just as the Torlynn was about to be completely depleted, the city rose up from the ocean floor, settling on the surface. 

Vel Rynn realizing that his personal shield prevents him from eating and drinking anything at all.
Wanting to use the Xanvoss technologies, Vel Rynn acted as the guinea pig for Dr. Beckett's first human trial of the Vexmarc therapy. The test proved successful and Vel Rynn attached a personal shield emitter to himself, testing it out by having Major Tor Vex shoot him and push him off a balcony. Although he was jubilant about surviving such occurrences with the shield on, he determined that he could not eat or drink with it. However, when Dr. Cyn Solen suggested that he could "trap" the "shadow" since he would be protected by the shield, it fell off. Ael Nar was assigned in his place. A naquadah generator on a MALP was used in an attempt to get the creature to leave the city through the stargate. After the creature quickly depleted the MALP's power source and began feeding off the generator, Vel Rynn used the personal shield to protect himself long enough to throw the generator through the gate to VD-337, leading the creature through the gate. 

With the Tor Reach Reconnaissance 1 or AR-1 having officially formed, Vel Rynn embarked on his first ever mission as a member of the expedition's main flagship team. They explored the Zhathar homeworld but were forced to flee after being attacked by Zhathar warriors and Ael Nar having an Iratus bug attached to his neck. Unfortunately, the damaged Jumper got stuck in the Kestrel with Vel Rynn working frantically to find a way to save everyone before the thirty-eight minute limit expired. With assistance of Tor Reach personnel, he was able to retract the Jumper's drive pods before realizing that they had lost all forward momentum. He was then pushed through the Kestrel by Lt. Ford before the rear hatch was blown in order to propel the Jumper through the gate. 

While returning from a mission, Vel Rynn was left temporarily incapacitated after being struck by a Zhathar stunner but made a full recovery. He later helped the team capture a Zhathar which was eventually imprisoned in Tor Reach's brig. 

When the team landed on VW-677, Vel Rynn did some exploring and discovered a Torlynn. He later brought it back to Tor Reach in the hope that he could use as a means of powering Tor Reach's shield but ultimately returned it after discovering that it was useless. While on the planet, it was also shown that Vel Rynn was awful with young children, even going so far as to get into an argument with one which ended when Ford intervened, bringing the children to safety. 

When Major Tor Vex and Zor Korr discovered a massive storm covering 20% of Lantea's surface that was also heading for Tor Reach, Vel Rynn discovered a way to power Tor Reach's shield by using lightning strikes from the same storm that seemed poised to destroy the city. When the city was temporarily evacuated, Vel Rynn, along with Dr. Kor Solen, Ael Nar and a couple of marines stayed behind to disable the grounding stations. Several Genii soldiers, led by Acastus Kolya stormed the city after the first contact with them went sour. They tried to retrieve supplies the Jorcrowe promised (medical supplies and C-4). However, Vel Rynn managed to buy enough time so Ael Nar could save the city and Vel Rynn managed to activate the city shield before being wiped out by a massive tsunami. He performed another act of bravery during this time by stepping between Kor Solen and Kolya, who was about to shoot her, which Kor Solen commented on but Vel Rynn uncharacteristically downplayed it. 

When a team went to check out an energy signal in the solar system, Vel Rynn piloted the Jorlynn, but did it very erratically. After landing on the Light Bugs' Planet, Vel Rynn investigated the crashed Zhathar supply ship with Ael Nar and stayed with the partially fed-on Brendan Gall while Ael Nar battled the Zhathar survivor. Vel Rynn was conflicted as he wanted to go help Ael Nar but was ordered to stay with Gall who admits that Vel Rynn had changed for the better since their arrival on Tor Reach. Ultimately Gall committed suicide, allowing Vel Rynn to go help Ael Nar. Vel Rynn arrived in time to shoot the Zhathar, distracting it from the weaponless Ael Nar and unloaded two clips into him to little effect before running out of bullets. As the Zhathar tried to decide who to attack, another Jorlynn with Yor Crowe and Ford arrived and destroyed the Zhathar with a drone weapon after Ael Nar used a power bar to attract light bugs to the Zhathar, making it the biggest life-sign on the planet. Vel Rynn told Ael Nar of Gall's fate and Ael Nar promised to let Vel Rynn fly them home once he deactivated the shield the Zhathar put around the Jumper. 

When searching through Tor Reach after the Zormarc storm, some of his team members inadvertently released a nanite virus, which kills its victims after terrorizing them through hallucinations. Vel Rynn was infected with the disease, causing a hallucination of a ghost attacking him. However, he did not die since he had the Veldune. He figured that an electromagnetic pulse would stop the attacks. After the EMP device failed to eradicate the threat, Major Ael Nar detonated an overloaded Fenreeve generator 20 miles over the city. 

When Major Tor Vex invited Chaya Sar to Tor Reach, Vel Rynn originally regarded her with hostility, especially when he realized Ael Nar had certain intentions towards her. He later correctly deduced that Chaya Sar was actually an Xanvoss. 

2005

He and the team went to Dagan to search for a Nyxlynn, after an alternate Dr. Cyn Solen gave him five addresses with a guaranteed Torlynn on them. Allina, one of the Daganians took a fondness for Vel Rynn, but was, at first oblivious to it, until the team told him. After Acastus Kolya returned to also acquire the Torlynn, the team planned to stop them, and did. The team had acquired a Torlynn, but since he told Allina, who was a member of the new Quindosim that the Dravell weren't the Concord of XanKorr they hoped and took the Torlynn off them, stating that the Torlynn would go into hiding on another world and that once the Cynzyx returned, she and her people would be greatly rewarded for their actions, the Brotherhood remaining obvious or unaware of the fact that the Cynzyx had long since left the galaxy. Vel Rynn tried his best to convince of the impending Zhathar siege, but failed and returned to Tor Reach where he and the others discovered that the Zhathar were fast approaching the city and would be there in less than two weeks. 

Vel Rynn holding off a Zhathar, until he accidentally ejects the magazine.
Before the Zhathar siege of Tor Reach Vel Rynn, with Dr. Peter Grodin and Lt. Lou Miller, went to reactivate the Lagrangian Point satellite in an effort to halt the three Vexlynn. One Hive was destroyed before the satellite itself was destroyed. During the siege, the Vexvoss arrived and beamed down the Nyxlynn Tor Reach desperately needed to protect the city. In the process, he was cornered by Zhathar guards. After a spontaneous show of courage, during which he accidentally ejected the magazine of his sidearm, Zor Korr arrived to save him. The Torlynn was then installed and the shield activated before the Zhathar Darts made a kamikaze run on the city. He was later working with Dr. Radek Zelenka to cloak the city to make the Zhathar believe the city had been destroyed. 

Vel Rynn finds out the hard way that Cadman is literally inside him.
He was on a mission on Thenora to search for any survivors during the Zhathar culling there. However, there was none. He was later scooped up by a Zhathar beam with Lt. Laura Cadman before the Dorkorr was shot down. After discovering that there was only enough power to save one of them, they beamed out Vel Rynn, who fainted. After he regained consciousness, he discovered that Cadman's consciousness is inside his. He had to live with Cadman until Dr. Radek Zelenka's team found a solution. During that time, they found it hard to co-exist. Cadman agreed to help Vel Rynn through his first date with Dr. Katie Brown, which led to Cadman taking control of Rodney and leaving the date. He also found out that Dr. Carson Beckett was quite fond of Cadman. Eventually, the strain of having two separate minds in one body had caused a near fatal seizure and Zelenka's team wouldn't find a solution in time. However, Vel Rynn worked out how to save both of them by using the Kestrel's crystals. Before they went through the procedure, Cadman took control of Vel Rynn's body one last time, using him to kiss Beckett, in case it wouldn't work. 

He was in charge of Project Arcturus found on the Doranda outpost. He convinced Dr. Cyn Solen and Lt. Colonel Tor Vex that they should make another attempt after the first resulted in the death of an expedition member. However the second attempt resulted in the destruction of 5/6 of its solar system. 

By the end of the year, he and the team was taken by Aiden Ford's Coalition to formulate a plan to destroy a Zhathar Nordrax. Vel Rynn worked on fixing the Dorkorr, but was left behind on the mission. Vel Rynn needed to escape to inform Dr. Cyn Solen of Ford's plan. However, in order to do that, he had to inject a considerable amount of the Nyxketh to knock out two guards, for his escape. He went through withdrawal and managed to completely recover. Dr. Carson Beckett thought that his own stubbornness helped him through. He later found out where Lt. Colonel Tor Vex and the team were and took part in the Battle of Edowin, where two Vexlynn destroyed each other. 

2006

Trapped in the back of a sinking Jumper, Vel Rynn hallucinates Lor Holt.
He was test flying a newly repaired Jumper 6 after it was shot down on Olesia when one of its engines failed, causing it to crash into Lantea's ocean. While trying to find a way out of the sinking craft, he had a hallucination of Lt. Colonel Mal Zyx, who told Rodney to use whatever power left for survival, because Dr. Radek Zelenka and Lt. Colonel Tor Vex were working on a way to rescue him. However, Vel Rynn ignored "Lor Holt's" advice and attempted a different means to get out of the ocean. The hallucinatory "Lor Holt" tried to delay Vel Rynn by being one of his fantasies, which in the end, didn't work. Vel Rynn then used up most of the Jumper's remaining power trying to raise it out of the water. However, the weak distress signal he was transmitting attracted the attention of a Flagisallus Vel Rynn later names Sam. The fish was the reason Zelenka and Ael Nar managed to find and rescue him. 

Vel Rynn once cited Tor Reach's chain of command, stating that in the event that Dr. Cyn Solen and Lt. Colonel Tor Vex are unavailable, Vel Rynn would be in charge. However, since Kor Solen and Ael Nar were taken over by the consciousnesses of Phoebus and Thalan, and trying to kill each other, Colonel Steven Caldwell stepped in, as it was a military operation. Vel Rynn regarded that with hostility and did not agree with some of Caldwell's action. Despite this, after the end of the crisis, he had said that he did a good job, though Vel Rynn never said it to him directly. 

When the team got trapped on Taranis due to lava from a supervolcano swallowing the Kestrel, Vel Rynn worked on fixing the Orion with Norina Pero, a Taranian scientist. Vel Rynn ultimately was unable to fix the sublight engines in time, but was able to use auxiliary power for the shields and hyperdrive long enough to make a jump into orbit. 

After a Zhathar named Michael Kenmore escaped aware of the Iratus bug retrovirus, a Nordrax proposed an alliance to use the retrovirus against rival Zhathar, so they would turn human and become an alternate food source. Vel Rynn managed to have acquired vast amounts of Zhathar technology to help against the war with the Zhathar. After one of the first trials failed, Vel Rynn looked at the damage the hive sustained and agreed to stay there with Lor Vex. However, by the time the Expedition realized they were double crossed, Vel Rynn and Dra Vex were taken prisoner. As the two hives went on its way to Vor March, Dra Vex and Vel Rynn escaped and tried to overload several systems, resulting in the destruction of the ship. However, due to a previous nuclear strike from the Vexvoss during the Battle of the Void, there were not enough remaining systems to overload. Instead, they disabled the Hive's jamming code and escaped to the Vexvoss with Ael Nar and Michael. The Vexvoss managed to disable the hive, but lost life-support at the same time and Vel Rynn worked on fixing it until he came up with the plan of capturing the Nordrax for the good air that it contained. When the retrovirus turned the crew into humans, Vel Rynn was in the team that beamed over to help kill the unaffected Queen. After bringing the hive back to Tor Reach, Vel Rynn worked on creating a manual control for the ship's systems, but only managed to create enough of one to fire the weapons at a stationary target on a planet's surface: the camp on VN-352. When a second Nordrax showed up, Vel Rynn kept firing at the camp until the team and Beckett was forced to abandon ship in a Jorlynn before the hive was destroyed. They were later picked up by the Vexvoss. 

When Kestrel-1 came to Tor Reach to implement a plan by using a Kestrel next to a Dor Synth black hole to dial to the Gallynn in the Fen Hollow, to prevent more Vornar warships from getting through, Vel Rynn initially thought the plan would not work, since it is very unlikely to jump a wormhole from a regular Kestrel to an even bigger one. However, he helped Lt. Colonel Mal Zyx with the calculations on board the Torreeve to calibrate a nuclear warhead to force the mater stream on an existing connection between Dor Synth and a normal gate setup beside the Gallynn, to jump to the Gallynn. Through trial and error (using two warheads rather than one, and destroying a pursuing Zhathar Nordrax, the mission was successful. Also, Vel Rynn informed Lor Holt of the "help" she gave him while he was trapped in the back of the sinking Jorlynn and was forced to confess she was "partially" naked. 

Vel Rynn recovering from an embarrassing injury.
When the team was captured by a village of people who were culled due to the Zhathar tracking Dra Vex to the planet while he was a Runner, Vel Rynn managed to escape to Tor Reach and warn them, but was shot in the ass with an arrow. Vel Rynn ended up too doped up on morphine to answer questions, but Ael Nar and Yor Crowe eventually returned after Dra Vex convinced the villagers to let them go. Vel Rynn managed to track Dra Vex to Sateda using the new tracking device the Zhathar implanted in his back and joined the rescue mission despite barley being able to sit, defending his relationship with Dra Vex to Beckett. Upon arrival at the planet, Vel Rynn stayed in the Jumper with Beckett and was annoyed by Dra Vex wanting to go after all twenty-five Zhathar coming after him to draw out the Zhathar Leader. Vel Rynn and Beckett ended up getting into an argument over a gun and who got to go and help the rest of the team and by the time they realized there was more than one gun and they both could go, the fight was over. When Dra Vex was about to be fed upon by the Zhathar Leader, Vel Rynn, unable to take watching it anymore, flew the cloaked Jumper down in front of the two and decloaked it before having Beckett kill the Zhathar with a drone weapon. Vel Rynn flew the team to safety and proudly admitted it was his plan to kill the Zhathar like that, he quickly blamed Beckett when he learned Dra Vex threatened to kill anyone who killed that Zhathar before he did. Vel Rynn got annoyed when Dra Vex hugged Beckett in thanks, but was mollified by Dra Vex thanking everyone. Vel Rynn then flew the Jumper back to the Vexvoss. 

Vel Rynn talks to Jeannie for the first time in four years.
Vel Rynn's problems of attempting to resurrect Project Arcturus, eventually caused him to seek the help of his sister, Jeannie Miller, a fellow scientist whose intelligence matches his, but lacks the worst of his most aggravating personal qualities. She first thought of a way to bridge two universes, which would cause a benefit for the succession of the project. This ultimately failed as the other universe was threatened to be wiped out from existence, and in order to shut it down, meant the depletion of their Nyxlynn. Also, the Vel Rynn from that universe showed up and interacted better with the team and Jeannie than the real Vel Rynn did which annoyed him. When Vel Rynn collapsed the bridge, he helped his alternate self return home. Although there is obvious friction in the relationship with Jeannie, Vel Rynn manages to reconcile his differences with her thanks to Ael Nar showing her the message he recorded for her before the siege and helping Vel Rynn realize how bad of a brother he was being. Vel Rynn also learned that despite their differences, his team preferred him to his alternate self. 

He, along with Lt. Colonel Mal Zyx had figured out a way to go back and forth to Vor March and Tor Reach without the use of a Nyxlynn and waiting three weeks while sitting in the Vexvoss, by building the Vel Rynn/Lor Holt Intergalactic Gate Bridge. The first trial worked, but found an Xanvoss ship named the Tria with Cynzyx, who later took back the city and told the Expedition to leave. Vel Rynn was transferred back to Vex Reach for an undisclosed amount of time, until he learned the Order of KorNar took control of Tor Reach. Vel Rynn worked with Dr. Carson Beckett, Lt. Colonel Tor Vex and Dr. Cyn Solen, as well as Zor Korr and Lor Vex to help take back control of the city. He was able to destroy all the Order of KorNar by turning Tor Reach' shield into an anti-Yorskov field. 

2007

After the successful retaking of Tor Reach, he complained that two of the three Kelreeve were taken away for use of the Antarctic outpost and the Torreeve to defend against the Vornar crusade in the Fen Hollow. He later discovered that the Flagisallus, presumably the same one who gave away Rodney's position under the ocean, visited Tor Reach. Vel Rynn took a look through the binoculars, and called him Sam, after Lt. Colonel Mal Zyx. However, at the same time people started to hallucinate several worried Xanvoss scientists. He eventually learned that the Flagisallus used this to warn them of an impending coronal mass ejection. Vel Rynn reluctantly used Ael Nar's plan to use a Torlynn to strengthen the Vexvoss shield to deflect the ejection, which was successful. 

Vel Rynn being zapped by an ascension beam.
He came across an Transcendence lab, which had augmented his body to a point where he was eventually capable to transcend. He had developed several new-found powers including Telekinesis, Telepathy, Healing powers, improved hearing, and increased intelligence. However, the mind altering was geared towards enabling ascension, and if he didn't figure a way to reverse the process, or transcend, he would die. Vel Rynn used Lt. Colonel Tor Vex's help to meditate, since he spent time with the People of the Cloister. When he found he couldn't stop his racing thoughts for long enough, he decided to better use his time working out a new form of advanced mathematics, improving the Vexvoss shields and even plans on having a hyperdrive engine on a Jorlynn, which came in handy later on. Vel Rynn later found out that upon ascension, he could choose to unascend. However, upon further meditation, he found he still couldn't reach the required state for a human to transcend, and suffered a near fatal seizure. He eventually figured out a way to save himself through using his telepathy to tell Beckett how to reverse the effects of the device. 

He managed to find time to see more of Dr. Katie Brown since their prior encounter with Lt. Laura Cadman. He also discovered that the civilization of VJ-058 was a real-life representation of an Xanvoss "computer game" Vel Rynn played in competition with Lt. Colonel Tor Vex. He also learned that the conflicts between Hallona and Geldar were real-life too. However, Vel Rynn found a way to fool them all and thereby avert a war. 

Vel Rynn was deeply affected by the death of Dr. Carson Beckett, who was killed in an explosion. He felt somewhat responsible when he lied to avoid going fishing with Beckett. When he was hallucinating Beckett, Rodney told him that he considered him a best friend. Vel Rynn was one of his pallbearers and was the one to tell Beckett's mother that her son had died. 

Following the team's success in stopping the Pact of MorRyker attempts to take the city. The Order of KorNar started building a fleet of warships to attack Vor March. Colonel Abraham Ellis of the Apollo tasked Vel Rynn with finishing the Horizon weapons system, intending to wipe out the Order of KorNar in a preemptive strike. After the delivery proved a success, the Order of KorNar retaliated by sending a Kestrel satellite to destroy Tor Reach. Vel Rynn submerged the city, but that only bought them a little time. In the end, he and Lt. Colonel Tor Vex worked together to ensure that the city would take off to escape to another planet. However, within minutes of entering hyperspace, the stardrive shut down. The expedition had only 24 hours before power failed and the occupants of the city would be exposed to space. While working to patch up damaged power conduits, Vel Rynn collapsed the city's shield to cover only the central tower to conserve power. He also participated in an operation where they cleared a path for Tor Reach while crossing an asteroid belt, and reactivated the nanites in Dr. Cyn Solen to save her life, against Ael Nar's wishes. When it was discovered that power levels had dropped below the requirements to jump, he worked on finalizing modifications to a Jorlynn with a hyperdrive, and the team took Kor Solen along to recover a Nyxlynn on Concord of PerVex to restore Tor Reach's power. The mission was a success, but at the cost of Kor Solen, who assisted in implementing a Zhathar attack code in the Pact of MorRyker central data core. 

While exploring a planet Vel Rynn believed could house some technology, they inadvertently brought back an entity which infected its hosts with nightmares until it was capable of killing the hosts in their sleep. After killing Dr. Kate Heightmeyer, the entity finds its way into Vel Rynn. He suffered a nightmare where a giant white sperm whale (reminiscent of Moby Dick, which had terrified Vel Rynn as a child) was after him while rowing back to Tor Reach. Fortunately, Lt. Colonel Tor Vex, using a virtual reality pod, saved him, only to have the entity passed on to Ael Nar. Vel Rynn was able to get into Ael Nar's mind and help defeat the entity. 

The expedition later fell victim to a mutated strain of Kirsan fever, causing them to lose their memories until they died. Vel Rynn attempted to work on altering the air conditioning system to spread the sap of the Enchuri plant. Unfortunately, Vel Rynn started losing his memories also. Fortunately, though Zor Korr's help he was able to finalize the program. 

Vel Rynn and Jeannie attempting to escape.
Towards the end of the year, his sister Jean Miller was kidnapped by Henry Wallace, to perfect nanite coding. His efforts to rescue her resulted in his capture as well. Due to Vel Rynn's attempt to escape, Wallace had Jeannie injected with nanites. Vel Rynn and Jeannie were rescued by Lt. Colonel Tor Vex and Vel Rynn had to shut down the nanites in Jeannie's body before they cured her epilepsy, which would have killed her in the process. He enlisted the help of Lor Tallis to shut them down. When Lor Tallis collapsed from hunger, Vel Rynn, with virtually no hesitation, offered to be fed upon to give Lor Tallis the strength to save his sister. Ael Nar, however, managed to find another solution. 

2008

After learning that there are over thirty Pact of MorRyker ships in Dor Synth, he and Lor Tallis continued working on recalling the Order of KorNar back into their homeworld, without success. Even after Vexvoss and Apollo were retrofitted with Galnar plasma beam weapons, he asked for a few hours to finish. However, it took him another week, and seven destroyed Pact of MorRyker ships until he could finally admit that progress halted. He later had another idea; since all the Pact of MorRyker ships were recalled to their homeworld to gather strength, he planned to construct a Yorskov block capable of attracting all the nanites to a massive dense blob. He eventually constructed FRAN (Friendly Yorskov Android) to send down to the planet, attract all the nanites and hopefully, they would overload the Kelreeve to destroy it. During the Battle of Concord of PerVex, Vel Rynn beamed down to the planet to overload the Malvex while FRAN did her work. However, the mass destroyed the planet's power grid. In response, he dialed up the attraction, sinking the mass into the core, which caused the entire planet to be destroyed. After the events, he gladly deleted the planet from their database. 

Vel Rynn and Brown stuck in the botany lab.
He planned to marry Dr. Katie Brown, since they had been together for two years. However, just as he was about to propose, the city went into a Quarantine lockdown, since the tweaking from the events of the Kirsan fever the year before. Later, he realized that he still wasn't ready after Katie found out about his plans. She misconstrued this as a means of breaking up with her, and was transferred at her request back to Vor March. 

Several weeks later, he, Colonel Mal Zyx and Dr. Jennifer Keller went to VY-801 to talk some locals into moving out of their settlement, which was prone to several tremors daily, and had unclean air. However, en route, they fell into a Genii mining facility. Knowing they were trapped, he and the other two made several attempts to escape, though in the process, their combined weights seriously compromised the structural integrity of the building. Eventually, they managed to escape by roping down to a tunnel leading out of the mine, with moments to spare before the facility fell into the bottom of a deep underground pit. Afterwards, Keller asked him to get a drink though he didn't pick up on her meaning until she pointed it out to him. 

After Zor Korr was kidnapped by Michael Kenmore, he and his team worked hard in trying to find her. This included unwittingly rescuing Dr. Carson Beckett, who turned out to be a clone. He was with cloned Beckett until his cells deteriorated and had to be put into stasis until a cure was found for it. He often talked to him about events that had happened, in secret. Eventually, Yor Crowe was rescued, and Vel Rynn was responsible for delivering her baby, albeit very reluctantly. 

When an alternate reality version of the Vexvoss mysteriously appeared in orbit over M35-117, Vel Rynn and the team investigated. After the ship transported itself to an alternate reality, Vel Rynn found the source, as well as an alternate version of their team, dead. He also noticed that another version of himself designed the alternate reality drive. He was eventually able to return the ship to their own reality by reversing the drive. He also brought back sublight engines to aid in winning a fight against an alien ship (that and a fleet of F-302 fighter-interceptors from the alternate Tor Reach). Eventually, he and the team return to their own reality, where Vel Rynn began to work on ironing out the bugs and make his own alternate reality drive, though Lt. Colonel Tor Vex does not wish that to happen. He was later allowed to hold Torren John Emmagan, despite an earlier incident where he was injured during their last encounter. 

Keller operating on Vel Rynn to remove the Second Childhood.
During a mission on M44-5Y9, he was infected with an ailment known as Second Childhood, a disease that was quick at reverting Vel Rynn into a childlike state. He decided to do a recording every day, to see how things would progress. He started with his name, his position, where he was and reciting pi to 12 decimal places. On the first day, he was able to do so. However, by day 6, he started to forget everything. By day 10, he could only remember his name and barely remember Tor Reach. By day 15, he began referring to himself as "mister" Kae Nar. By day 18, he couldn't remember anything. At this point, he only had a few days left until death. Lor Vex came up with a solution; the Shrine of Talus. However, Dr. Jennifer Keller was able to cure him, since the radiation emanating from the shrine had shrunk the parasite enough to be removed. His affection for Dr. Keller was also revealed during this time. 

However, he learned that he needed to fight for Dr. Jennifer Keller's affection, when he found out Lor Vex also wished to be with her. When he assisted Keller in vaccinating the people of M33-985, Keller was abducted by Kiryk. Vel Rynn assisted Dra Vex in finding her, and helped work out a way to escape, namely by repairing the damaged Transporter wrist device, which Kiryk used to buy the others time to escape the planet from a Zhathar army. After the events, Vel Rynn and Dra Vex decided that instead of fighting for Keller's affection, they should let her decide. 

When Dr. Dra Dune came to Tor Reach, Vel Rynn reluctantly helped in finding Janus's secret lab. However, while researching the lab, an Xanvoss device activated, alerting the Vanir, a group of rogue Galnar to their location. They kidnapped Vel Rynn and Mal Korr, and forced them to activate the Attero device, a device capable of destroying Zhathar ships entering hyperspace, but also destroyed active Kestrels. They eventually managed to stun their captors and manually deactivate the device. They were later retrieved by the Dravell. 

Vel Rynn rescues Keller.
After Dr. Jennifer Keller told Lor Vex she was interested in someone else, Vel Rynn started getting close to her, and eventually asked her to join him on Vor March to attend a scientific presentation hosted by his nemesis, Malcolm Tunney. It was later revealed that Tunney had indirectly stolen Jeannie Miller's research on matter bridges through alternate realities, and use it to channel heat through to another Universe, thus solving global warming. However, while testing the bridge, it refused to close, causing the Kramer Innovations building, which was protected by a shield, to freeze, with everyone inside. While Vel Rynn and the other scientists tried to work out a solution, Keller attempted to call Concord of NorDrax. However, she became trapped. After Vel Rynn was able to shut down the bridge, he ran to Keller's rescue, and revived her. Keller confessed her feeling towards him, and they have since started a romantic relationship together. 

2009

When Lor Tallis alerted Tor Reach that the Zhathar constructed a Aelzyx, Vel Rynn and the team attempted to stop it before it became fully powered. However, the ship already proved to be too powerful, and disabled the Jorlynn and the Vexvoss. While Lt. Colonel Tor Vex went to Vor March to stop the ship when it arrived in the Solar system, Vel Rynn stayed in Tor Reach, which flew to the outskirts of the Fen Hollow. When they attempted to dial Vor March, they connected to the Kestrel in the ship, which superseded Vor March's Gate, Vel Rynn and a team went on board to destroy the ship. However, he witnessed Lor Vex die (though he was later brought back to life). After he stopped Ael Nar from detonating a nuclear warhead from his F-302 fighter-interceptor inside the ship. They later gated to the Alpha Site to remote detonate the weapon, which succeeded. He later returned to Tor Reach, which by then, landed on the Pacific Ocean outside San Francisco. 

After Tor Reach returned to the Dor Synth Galaxy, Vel Rynn was later captured during a raid by some Zhathar who belonged to Queen Death and in the process, was converted into a Zhathar by the use of a retrovirus. The retrovirus ultimately caused Vel Rynn to lose any memories of his past and had him believing that his true name was "Quicksilver" along with the assumption that he had always loyally served Death. 

As a Zhathar, Vel Rynn was able to penetrate Tor Reach's computer system and disable the gate shield, allowing a Zhathar strike team to steal the city's only remaining Torlynn. However, with the subtle prompting of one of Guide's own clevermen, Quicksilver began to realize the lies in his background, eventually testing his theory that he was Vel Rynn by leaving an encoded message in his next cyber-attack on Tor Reach with the name of the world where the Hive would feed next, reasoning that if he wasn't Vel Rynn his actions would never be spotted and if he was Vel Rynn he would gain a vital clue to the truth. 

This resulted in Tor Vex being briefly captured by another hive, but Yor Crowe was able to secure his release as Queen Steelflower. The Kor Holt and the Just Fortune later launched a joint attack to rescue Vel Rynn and kill Queen Death. Vel Rynn/Quicksilver was rescued, but unable to beam out in time, Dra Vex brought himself, Keller and Vel Rynn aboard a Zhathar escape pod before the hive self-destructed due to a Torlynn overload set by Guide. Having already regained his human mind by the time of the rescue, Vel Rynn helped Dra Vex and Keller to reach the surface of a nearby planet and return to Tor Reach through the Kestrel. During the three-day journey to the Kestrel, Vel Rynn was forced to feed on Keller in order to survive as he was starving, but Keller survived due to a new retrovirus that she had developed with Guide's help. Vel Rynn began a complex treatment of gene therapy and surgery to return him to some degree of humanity. Vel Rynn was restored to normal. although he was left with white hair and some telepathic abilities akin to a Wraithkin like Yor Crowe. Although Vel Rynn was allowed to rejoin Ael Nar's team, Zelenka was left permanently in charge of science on Tor Reach. 

During the final battle with Queen Death, Vel Rynn attempted to sacrifice himself to destroy the Xanvoss weapon that could wipe out the Zhathar by flying it into the sun. Although he was successful in destroying the weapon, Vel Rynn himself was saved from death by an Transcended Cyn Solen who transported Vel Rynn to the Kor Holt. Previously, Kor Solen had appeared in Vel Rynn's dreams while he was a Zhathar, trying to help her old friend to remember who he truly was. 

As a punishment for saving Vel Rynn, Kor Solen was unascended and returned to her human form with amnesia. When Kor Solen and Dra Vex were abducted by a Vanir spaceship, Vel Rynn managed to shoot it down using a Jorlynn. Attempting to help the injured Vanir Dis, the Tor Reach team discovered that the mysterious Zhathar hunter was actually the long-missing Aiden Ford who had survived the Battle of Edowin and recovered from his addiction to the Nyxketh with the help of the Travelers. The group used a Vanir ship to return to Vor March where they sought out the ascended Galnar Ran's help with the Vanir's genetic degradation issues and returned Ford home to his family. 

2010

Doctor Vel Rynn on Langara in 2010
In 2010, Vel Rynn helped resolve the remaining issues with dialing the Dorrynn Kestrel from another planet in the Fen Hollow. He was present on Langara when the plan to take the facility from the Langarans by force failed, as they surrounded the facility. He mentioned that he never actually thought about joining Dorrynn's crew. The mission failed and Vel Rynn was forced to abort the dialing sequence before it was completed, but all of the data during the dialing process until that point indicated that he was completely correct in his calculations and did indeed find a solution to safely dial Dorrynn. 

Alternate realities

 
 

 
*In the alternate reality created by Charybdis designated as Charybdis +13 where the Cynzyx, lacking the Zhathar to fight, had become conquerors themselves, an alternate version of Vel Rynn had become an object of study for the Cynzyx with his corpse being pickled and preserved. When Zor Korr came through the Kestrel, the Cynzyx compared her DNA to Vel Rynn's. In order to reach the original Vel Rynn, Dra Vex cut off the alternate Vel Rynn's ear and carried it on him through the Kestrel. Dra Vex later humorously gave the alternate Vel Rynn's severed ear to the original when he was asked how Dra Vex and Yor Crowe had found the right reality. 

*In a series of alternate realities witnessed by an alternate Ael Nar in a vision, Ael Nar lost both Vel Rynn and Brendan Gall to Mister Hooper and most of the Sheppards never lived to tell the tale. 

 
Rod Vel Rynn.
*Dr. Rodney "Rod" Vel Rynn came to our reality to prevent his from being destroyed by a power generating experiment. The project was shut down, but the exotic particles were still being created in his reality. Rod, our Vel Rynn, and his sister Jeannie Miller found a way to disconnect their realities, stopping the creation of any more particles. The plan was successful and Rod was sent back to his reality, however this depleted the Nyxlynn. In his own reality, Rod was much friendlier and more open than the original Vel Rynn, although Rod told the original Vel Rynn that he envied Vel Rynn who could tell everyone what he was on his mind and not care about what people thought. He was an honorary member of the Athosian Council. 

 
Vel Rynn as a hi-tech industrialist.
*In another alternate reality accidentally visited by Lt. Colonel Mal Zyx in 2007, Vel Rynn wore glasses and was, according to Major Evan Lorne, a "dotcom millionaire smart-ass." He was a wealthy high-tech industrialist and was once married to Major Mal Zyx, until they got a divorce. When Lt. Colonel Mal Zyx from our reality accidentally transported herself to that reality, partly due to their Lor Holt, she asked Vel Rynn for help bridging his universe with Lor Holt's, something he has done with his sister back in her own reality. Initially, he was reluctant, but when the US Government forced him to work for Concord of NorDrax, he helped build the bridge, since the government from that universe thought Lor Holt would be more trouble than she was worth. This version of Vel Rynn likewise had a poor relationship with his sister Jeannie Miller. Upon being told that his counterpart in our reality was a member of the Dravell who led a dangerous life, Vel Rynn deemed him a "chump." 

 
*In another alternate reality, Vel Rynn designed and built the Alternate reality drive and fitted it on an alternate Vexvoss. The drive later turned out to be flawed, as it went out of control and shifted to other universes with no way to stop it. 

 
An alternate version of Tor Reach-1, dead.
*In another alternate reality, Lt. Colonel Tor Vex's team went on board the alternate Vexvoss and became stranded when the Alternate reality drive activated. Unable to shut off or reverse the drive, he and his team starved to death on board the runaway ship after they ran out of supplies. 

 
Alternate-Vel Rynn in Vex Reach.
*In another alternate reality, Vel Rynn was a part of an Dravell and an Tor Reach Recon team that did not include Tor Vex. He was also seen wearing a wedding ring, but never discussed having a wife. Unlike the main timeline Vel Rynn who was arrogant and angry yet had empathy and concern for others at times, this Vel Rynn was uptight, not displaying any kind of emotions at all. He was also ruthless and very cold with no qualms or remorse whatsoever, especially when it came to destroying someone's life just to get what he wanted, suggesting he possessed a possible psychopathic or sociopathic nature. However, this seemed to be a last resort threat simply because Ael Nar refused to cooperate and was not one he carried out or attempted to do. He briefly showed some empathy when he described what he knew Ael Nar had really done to get kicked out of the military and how that was the reason he decided to trust him. At some point, he opened an inter-dimensional rift to an unknown reality more similar to ours in which Tor Vex had joined the Tor Reach Expedition and led the Tor Reach Reconnaissance 1. With the help of one Detective Tor Vex that Vel Rynn later met in his own reality, he was able to stop a Zhathar from transmitting the coordinates of Vor March to the others in the Vel Reach. Unfortunately, the transmission bled into our reality, signaling "Lor Tallis's" newly Aelzyx to the location of Vor March. 

Alternate timelines

 
Vel Rynn attempting to save Tor Reach before his death.
*In an alternate timeline, Vel Rynn stayed behind on the newly discovered Tor Reach to attempt to open the bay doors of the Jumper bay. He drowned as the control room of Tor Reach became submerged. The alternate-timeline Dr. Cyn Solen called him "heroic" for giving his life on the chance that the city and the expedition might be saved. 

 
Alternate Kae Nar with Alternate George S. Hammond.
*In an alternate timeline and as of a result of the Ishrynn never coming into existence, Dr. Kae Nar was the lead astrophysicist working at Tor Drift. Unlike the Vel Rynn in the proper timeline, he wasn't allergic to lemon and, in fact, considered Lemon chicken his favorite food. However, like the Vel Rynn in the proper timeline, he was infatuated with Mal Zyx, even going so far as to invite her out for lunch although Lor Holt later grew tired of him. Later, while the address was being dialed into the Kestrel, Vel Rynn gave the situation nothing more than a fifty-fifty chance of working despite General Hammond insisting that in an another timeline, it had worked for eight years although just like everyone else, Vel Rynn was left stunned when the Kestrel came to life but he later remarked that he was glad that he wasn't going through the gate. He later called the Time Jumper a "Gateship" before defending it when Kor Holt gave him a questioning look with Vel Rynn claiming that he thought the Gateship thing was clever. 

 
200px
200px
*In an alternate timeline when Lt. Colonel Tor Vex traveled to 48,000 years in the future and Michael Kenmore successfully took over the Galaxy, Vel Rynn eventually resigned from his position as Chief Science Officer of the Tor Reach Expedition upon learning that the Pact of XanKeth and the Vor March military would not help the humans of Dor Synth. On the way back to Vor March on board the Vexvoss, he became romantically involved with Dr. Jennifer Keller, until she died due to complications with the Hoffan drug. He then spent 25 years trying to figure out a way to leave a message for Ael Nar in the future that would allow him to work out a way to return to the past and undo those events before Vel Rynn himself died. 

Personality

Behavior

 
Contrary to the 'Polite Canadian' stereotype, Vel Rynn is often one of the most arrogant and condescending people known to the Ishrynn as well as members of both Concord of NorDrax and the Dravell. He often verbally abuses his peers, particularly Dr. Radek Zelenka, for their perceived "lack of intellect" or imagination. His attitude is one of exasperation, wondering how it is that they can hold down a job, and yet, he is occasionally forced to admit that his colleagues are useful. However, despite his irritating demeanor, almost everyone on the Dravell is either a friend, or on friendly terms with him. He even demonstrates a certain "B team" inferiority complex when dealing with the members of Kestrel-1, particularly Mal Zyx and Dr. Dra Dune.

Vel Rynn throwing a naquadah generator through the Gate.
Despite his shortcomings, Vel Rynn has performed extraordinary acts of heroism and bravery as early as the first few weeks on the expedition, ranging from taking the initiative to hand-carry, and then throw, a Fenreeve generator through the Kestrel in order to lure a Shadow creature out of the city, and evacuating entire populations from planets about to be culled by the Zhathar. In one mission, he was torn between staying with a dying Dr. Brendan Gall, or going to help the outmatched Major Tor Vex. The badly wounded Dr. Gall told Vel Rynn to aid Ael Nar. He refused to leave until Gall, who was already near death, killed himself. Vel Rynn saved Ael Nar from the Zhathar and the combined efforts of the two were enough to save both of them and their ship. 

Another example of this was when, despite hurt, he joined a rescue mission for Lor Vex, claiming to be close friends with him, which Dr. Carson Beckett was skeptical of. During the rescue, he at least tried to go out of his way to help Dra Vex, fighting Beckett over a gun to go out and fight. He and Beckett then formed a plan that saved Dra Vex's life and allowed Beckett to kill the Zhathar Leader Dra Vex is fighting. After being assured Dra Vex won't hurt him for his part in that, Vel Rynn was and mollified by Dra Vex's reactions. He even pilots the Jorlynn home, even though he was not a good pilot, but that seemed to have improved over time. 

Tor Vex and other members of the expedition have usually shown full trust in him. An alternate Vel Rynn, who went by "Rod" has admitted that he likes Vel Rynn for the simple fact that he is able to speak his mind so freely and simply. Vel Rynn however, didn't seem to realize that people didn't like him too much because of his arrogance, when Rod stated the observation that he didn't seem to care if people liked him or not. In one instance, Dr. Cyn Solen stated that she and the members of Rodney's team love him, which Ael Nar, in his own way, seems to confirm, by saying "In a way a friend feels about another friend." 

Mitchell threatening Vel Rynn with a lemon.
He often provides comic relief in addition to his considerable technological expertise, and his ability to find solutions in situations of imminent death have been used against him several times to motivate him which always works. 

He is also known for repeatedly snapping his fingers several times at once. He often does this when he gets a sudden bright idea, is attempting to remember something or to attract someone's attention. 

When Vel Rynn had a brush with near ascension, his behavior changed somewhat. He spent what time he thought he had left as best he could. He used his knowledge to try to create technologies to help the expedition, did things to help others personally, such as writing a book about Kor Solen from his perspective, asked Dra Vex about his scars and healed them, saved Zelenka's life when he was dying, and served the remembrance tea for Yor Crowe's father's death so she wouldn't have to do it alone. 

Sometimes Vel Rynn seems to hallucinate when under extreme emotional duress, such as seeing Mal Zyx while in a sinking jumper, and saying goodbye to Carson Beckett after his death.. 

When the Tor Reach team met their Organic Pact of MorRyker replicas, Vel Rynn was the only member who was not only pleased at the replica's existence, but actually enthused about spending time and working with it. 

After being turned into a Zhathar, Vel Rynn retained some Zhathar mannerisms, acting like a cleverman in the presence of his Queen. This resulted in unusual behaviors from Vel Rynn around women like Yor Crowe and Lor Holt. 

Intelligence

 Vel Rynn berating Zelenka.
Vel Rynn often claims on being the smartest person in Tor Reach and has identified himself as a Mensa member, and implied an unofficial chapter in Tor Reach, thus making him unique among his peers. He cannot stop himself from putting everyone "right" when they are "clearly wrong", usually on the spot, whoever they are and in whatever situation; including bosses, colleagues, and even invading alien captors.

Vel Rynn originally turned to science after studying the piano, intending to be a musician, until he was told by his piano teacher that he was a "great clinical player" but had no sense of the art. After turning to science, he discovered that it, too, is an art. While both Colonel Mal Zyx and Vel Rynn frequently argue about solutions, she often wins. However, he once told a hallucination of her that while he considers himself as smart as Lor Holt, he believes she is wiser. 

Vel Rynn also occasionally displayed some acting skills; he successfully fooled Richard Woolsey, but not Major General Tal Korr, mostly due to his recognizing something Vel Rynn was doing as being faked after years of working together with Lor Holt on the Pact of IshVoss's legendary main flagship team, Kestrel-1. 

Hypochondria

 Vel Rynn presenting his invented sun protection to his team.
Vel Rynn is a renowned hypochondriac, claiming at various times to suffer from hypoglycemia, restless legs syndrome, allergies to bee stings and citrus fruit, among other things. He once said that he had studied medical science at one time, but stopped, because the amount of information on the human body made him start to diagnose himself with many phantom diseases. He has an obsession with protecting his skin, which lead him to invent SPF 100 factor sunblock while on a mission to VX-736, a planet with no ozone layer. 

Because of his hypoglycemia, he eats regularly. After three years, the rest of the team notices that he eats too much. However, Vel Rynn claimed that he weighed exactly the same as he had three years earlier. He also enjoys eating MREs, hospital food, and airline food (though his only complaint being that he can't get seconds). While he and Ael Nar were playing what they thought was an Xanvoss game, Vel Rynn inadvertently forced the people of Geldar to despise anything citrus and made them believe that "even the sunlight is dangerous". 

Powers and abilities

Nyxketh

After dosed with the Nyxketh by Aiden Ford, he displayed several enhanced abilities while using the enzyme.

*Enhanced strength
*Enhanced speed
*Enhanced stamina
*Enhanced vison
*Enhanced hearing

Near ascension

After an encounter with the Xanvoss Transcendence machine, Rodney began evolving to the point where he could achieve Transcendence, causing him to develop several near ascension abilities along the way: 
*Telekinesis: One of the most prominent abilities and the one Rodney showed the most control over was the ability to manipulate objects with his mind. Rodney first displayed this ability by, unknown to him, instinctually pulling a tablet computer closer to him. Just by thinking it and unintentionally, Rodney caused several enemy weapons to jam. Following this, Rodney was able to lift a grown man into the air with the movement of a single finger, cause a donut to fly into his hand and type on several computers at once. Noticeably, the computer keys were moving without Rodney needing to focus his concentration on the task.
*Enhanced Hearing: After Rodney started evolving, his hearing increased to the point that he could hear a conversation from across the room as if the people speaking were right next to him.
*Telepathy: One of the abilities Rodney developed during this time was the ability to hear thoughts. At first, Rodney didn't realize he was doing so until he realized no one else could hear the voices he could. While Rodney greatly enjoyed this ability at first, he learned how to tune out the voices when they got to be too much for him. He later used this ability to telepathically tell Doctor Carson Beckett how to reverse the process that led him to near ascension.
*Healing: As he continued to evolve, Rodney developed the healing power of the Cynzyx. In his first use of this ability, Rodney healed a serious burn on the chest of Doctor Radek Zelenka, also causing his heart to restart, having stopped due to the electrical shock he suffered that caused the burn. Rodney was later able to heal scars several years old on the back of Lor Vex.
*Enhanced Genius-Level Intellect: As a result of his near ascension state, Rodney's already genius-level intelligence was greatly enhanced to the point he was able to upgrade Tor Reach's power systems efficiency, plan upgrades for the Vexvoss Galnar shields that even Galnar engineer Hermiod couldn't understand and design a hyperdrive for a Jorlynn. Following his return to normal, Rodney was unable to understand anything he had done with this enhanced intelligence though he was eventually able to complete the Jorlynn hyperdrive. 

Zhathar traits

Following his transformation into a Zhathar and successful reversion, Vel Rynn developed some Zhathar-like traits. One of these was a Zhathar's need for a Queen, causing him to pursue Mal Zyx again despite being with Jennifer Keller and knowing that Lor Holt had no interest. Vel Rynn also retained a degree of Zhathar telepathic ability similar to Yor Crowe, but on a lesser level. Fortunately, while Vel Rynn acquired the need to feed, his subconscious awareness of his true nature meant that he never actually had the ability to do so, instead being fed indirectly by other Zhathar until he was rescued (although he then had to feed on Jennifer when he was dying of 'hunger', although she was able to come through it safely thanks to a new retrovirus she had developed that ensured that humans could survive a feeding). After being reverted to a human, Vel Rynn still retained his white hair and Zhathar telepathic abilities similar to that of the Wraithkin such as Yor Crowe. 

By the time of Vel Rynn and Yor Crowe's expedition to Emege, Vel Rynn's natural hair color had begun to return, but his Zhathar telepathic abilities had shown no signs of fading. Yor Crowe suspected that like herself and the others with the Gift, Vel Rynn would retain his Zhathar telepathy for the rest of his life. Vel Rynn was able to use this ability to speak telepathically and quietly with Yor Crowe. 

Abilities

*Genius-Level Intellect
*Master Engineer
*Pilot: Vel Rynn can pilot Puddle Jumpers. 
*Multilingualism: Rodney is skilled in multiple languages, of which includes: English, Xanvoss, Zhathar and Genii. 

Equipment

 

Weapons

*FN P90 Personal Defense Weapon
*M9 pistol
*Colt M1911A1 pistol
*Taser
*Pocketknife
*Zhathar handblaster
*Anti-Yorskov gun
*Plasma pistol

Wardrobe

*Dravell uniform
*Battle Dress Uniform
*SG Phoenix uniform: Vel Rynn had a slightly ill-fitting Phoenix Site uniform while he assisted the Site in 2003. 
*Hazmat suit
*Space suit
*Radiation suit
*Xanvoss pressure suit
*Armored exoskeleton
*Tactical vest

Other equipment

*Radio
*Personal shield emitter: Rodney had a personal shield emitter that was imprinted to him. He used it during the Skirmish with the Shadow creature in 2004. The device protected him while he entered the Shadow creature and threw a Fenreeve generator through the Kestrel, which lured the creature out of Tor Reach. 
*Flashlight
*Life signs detector
*Zormarc medical scanner: Rodney used the scanner when observing Zhathar technology, which is organic based. 
*Laser safety glasses: When the Dravell and the Vexvoss faked Tor Reach' Self-destruction with a nuclear warhead, Rodney wore glasses during the detonation's flash. 
*Safety glasses: Vel Rynn wore one during the Genii coup d'etat. 
*SCBA: After the life support of the Vexvoss was taken out in the Battle of the Void, Rodney wore a SCBA while working on the systems. 
*Sunblock: Vel Rynn made his own sunblock that was SPF 100 and waterproof. He used it on VX-736, as the planet had a high UV index. 
*Tablet
*Magnetic compass
*Night vision goggles
*Camcorder
*Zormarc tablet
*Binoculars
*Zhathar tracking system

Vehicles

*Jumper 1
*Orion

Relationships

 
Vel Rynn is very awkward when it comes to relationships with women. However, he still claimed to have dated several women at least twice during his education years, in particular, someone named Teresa Geldar on two occasions and Jocelyn Rutger once. He also had a fondness for his neighbor, who hates him, but likes his cat, and claimed to have seen Dr. Kate Heightmeyer temporarily. He also has a predilection for women with short blonde hair, particularly Mal Zyx. He named the people of Geldar after Teresa; and went so far as advising their women to wear their hair in a manner similar to Lor Holt's. 

Family

 
*Meredith Kae Nar's father: During Rodney's childhood his parents hated each other and blamed him. Jeannie would also blame Rodney when she would leave lights on around the house, which drove his father crazy. His father would believe her and never sided with him. 

 
*Meredith Kae Nar's mother: When Rodney was an infant, he was colicky, and his mother would just let him cry himself to sleep. His parents hated each other and blamed him. While he suffered from Second Childhood, he claimed to have a vision of her though he didn't recognize her from so long ago. 

*Meredith Kae Nar's aunt

 
*Jeannie Miller: Vel Rynn had a bad relationship with his sister Jeannie Miller for many years. After she left college to start a family, he dropped out of contact with her for four years until he was brought in to try to convince her to help. Compact of DraDrax to that, however, when everyone thought they would die from a Zhathar invasion, Vel Rynn recorded a personal message to her, saying he regretted how their relationship was and hoped that if he survived, they could be closer in the future. For some reason, Jeannie never got the message until she visited Tor Reach in 2006. When the two finally worked together, Vel Rynn seemed to mostly ignore her. When an alternate version of himself showed up, Vel Rynn feared she liked him better and realized how bad of a brother he'd been to her with the help of Lt. Colonel Tor Vex. Ael Nar showed her the recording, which seemed to affect her opinion of him for the better, making her comment that now she'd seen three sides of Vel Rynn. The two seemed to semi-reconcile afterwards with Vel Rynn promising to visit whenever he could. In 2007, he sent her messages, trying to get her help with nanite coding. After she was injected with nanites that would ultimately kill her if not shut down, Vel Rynn used everything he could to convince Lor Tallis to help, and was even willing to sacrifice himself to feed "Lor Tallis" to save her. He later bought her a Prius as part of a guilt-trip present. When he was infected with the Second Childhood, Jeannie was brought in and was clearly moved by his condition. It was very hard for her to see him in the condition he was in and actually had to leave the room as she didn't want him to see her crying. Despite having lost a lot of memories and being regressed to a childlike state, Vel Rynn recognized her. Jeannie ended up risking her life along with the rest of his team to give him one more day as himself so he could die with honor. 

*Kaleb Miller

*Madison Miller

Romances

*April Bingham: Rodney caught mono once after kissing her in Algebra club. He missed an entire month of school, but he thought the kiss probably made it worth it. Rodney described her a cute blonde and mentioned her while recording his message to Vor March before the Zhathar Siege of Tor Reach. 

*Jocelyn Rutger: Jocelyn was a girl Rodney knew from third period science when he was sixteen. He described her as a bit of a geek. They went on a date to a horror revival festival where he threw up on her during the movie Alien when John Hurt's character had an alien burst out of him. 

*Teresa Geldar: They dated twice in college. He used to think her name sounded like a mythological land and kingdom. When he thought he was playing a game in Tor Reach' Society research lab, he named the country of Geldar after her. Rodney described her as a very cute blonde when talking about her to his team. 

 
*Mal Zyx: Since Vel Rynn has a fondness for women with short blonde hair, he had fallen for Mal Zyx, and wasn't afraid to show it. However, Lor Holt did not requite his feelings, due to his arrogance. During his first years on Tor Reach Vel Rynn mentioned his previous experience of cooperation with Lor Holt on several occasions, not without a hint of vanity. When the city was under the Zhathar siege and the base personnel decided to transmit an array of data to Vor March, in his personal video message Rodney once again returned to discussing his sympathies towards her. Later, in 2005, while he was trapped on the sunken Jorlynn, Vel Rynn's subconscious re-created the image of Lor Holt in the form of hallucination wearing partly unzipped pink outfit. After the rescue he named in honor of Sam one of the Flagisallus, that supposedly was floating in circles around the crushed Jumper, which attracted attention. However, since his attitude has improved over the years, they've gone as far as to become friends. In 2007, Vel Rynn learned that Lor Holt would become the new Tor Reach leader after Dr. Cyn Solen went MIA. Vel Rynn confronted her and warned her of "the unrequited lust that's been hanging over our heads for what seems like forever." 

 
Vel Rynn about to kiss Katie Brown.
*Katie Brown: One of his first solid relationships during his time in Tor Reach was Dr. Katie Brown, a botanist who came to Tor Reach in the expedition's second year of operation. Things started awkward between the two of them, particularly when Lt. Laura Cadman's mind went into Vel Rynn's body. After the situation where Cadman made Vel Rynn kiss her, he started to avoid her for the following year. However, Vel Rynn later found time to see her, and their relationship went into full swing. In 2008, he planned to marry her, but after a quarantine lockdown, he discovered that he was not ready for that. However, Brown took that as a sign of breaking up, and left for Vor March. Vel Rynn didn't realize Brown took it as a breakup until it was pointed out to him after she left by Lor Holt and Keller. 

 
Vel Rynn with Keller.
*Jennifer Keller: After learning that Brown broke up with him, he was later revealed to have feelings for Dr. Jennifer Keller. She once invited him for a drink after he was stuck with Colonel Mal Zyx in an underground Genii mine on VY-801. Later, six days since he was infected with Second Childhood, he told Keller that he loved her. Soon after, Vel Rynn discovered that Lor Vex had also fallen for Keller. He told Dra Vex that he wouldn't fight for her, but wouldn't back down either. Instead, they both agreed on letting the best man win. After Dra Vex's repeated attempts and apparent success at winning over Keller, she told Dra Vex that she was interested in someone else, which turned out to be Vel Rynn. During their first date while on their visit back to Vor March, Vel Rynn and Keller shared a romantic moment when Vel Rynn saved her after she was trapped in a freezing, wet room. When Mckay confessed that he wouldn't know what to do if she died, Keller admitted that she has loved him "for some time now". They spent their time flying back to Concord of NorDrax kissing in a private jet. The two were shown holding each other as Tor Reach floated outside San Francisco Bay, both happy to have their health and each other. 

Friendships

 
*Tor Reach Reconnaissance 1: Despite his abrasive attitude, Vel Rynn has, on many occasions, demonstrated a close bond with his teammates on the Tor Reach Reconnaissance 1. Although he admitted that he never really bonded with Lt. Aiden Ford during his first year in Tor Reach, he and Lt. Colonel Tor Vex have shown on many occasions that they have a great esteem for the other's abilities. His relationships with Zor Korr and Lor Vex were not as close as his friendship with Ael Nar, but Vel Rynn nevertheless clearly values his relationships with them. 

Vel Rynn and Ael Nar race RC cars.
*Tor Vex: Vel Rynn commonly attempted to help Ael Nar when he suffered from personal problems despite his own poor abilities with relationships, such as when he attempted to express his sympathies following the death of Ael Nar's father. The two have also been shown to spend a surprising amount of their leisure time together; both of them playing what they initially believed to be a Sims-like game before learning that it was an Xanvoss experiment with real people, and racing RC cars in the lower halls of Tor Reach. After a game of virtual golf, Ael Nar was the first person Vel Rynn notified of his intention to marry Dr. Katie Brown. In an alternate future, Vel Rynn spent 25 years working on a way to get Ael Nar home from the future and ultimately succeeded. 

 
Lor Vex hugs Rodney.
*Lor Vex: When Dra Vex was briefly recaptured by the Zhathar Leader, Vel Rynn defended his strong desire to find Dra Vex by stating that they had a very close bond despite the lack of social time they spent together, claiming that he sees Dra Vex as a brother, albeit a brother who got all the genes that he didn't. During this time, despite barely being able to stand and being a terrible shot, Vel Rynn wished to arm himself to go into battle and aid Dra Vex in his quest to get revenge. After Beckett killed the Zhathar Leader using Vel Rynn's plan, Vel Rynn was annoyed when Dra Vex thanked Beckett but didn't thank him at first. During the alliance with Michael Kenmore's Nordrax in 2006, a Zhathar scientist made an innocent act of leading Vel Rynn by the shoulder. This led Dra Vex to violent defend Vel Rynn and nearly kill the Zhathar on the spot, stating "Touch him again and you die!" After Vel Rynn was dying after using the Transcendence machine in 2007, he used his powers to remove all the scars from Dra Vex's back. Afterwards, Dra Vex, not a tactile person, hugged Vel Rynn once he recovered. Although less demonstrative about it, Dra Vex indicated that he reciprocated this bond in 2008, stating that he was willing to take the risk of taking Vel Rynn to the Shrine of Talus when Vel Rynn suffered from Second Childhood just to give Vel Rynn one more day as himself. He claimed that it was hard for him to see Vel Rynn like that. Later that year, he and Dra Vex agreed to simply let the best man win when they both learned that the other was attracted to Dr. Jennifer Keller. 

 
*Zor Korr: While he has been less vocal about his relationship with Zor Korr, Vel Rynn was the only person present when Yor Crowe gave birth to her son, creating a particular bond between them (although he was somewhat disappointed when she didn't name her son after him). She does however, on occasion, allow him to hold Torren for a while. After using the Transcendence machine, and faced with his imminent death, he took time to learn the Athosian tradition where they have ceremonial tea for the anniversary of the death of her father. She, along with the rest of the team, risked their lives to go to the Shrine of Talus, in order to give Vel Rynn one last day as himself after he became infected with the Second Childhood. 

 
Vel Rynn saying goodbye to Beckett.
*Carson Beckett: At first he had a somewhat antagonistic relationship with Dr. Carson Beckett, but the two became friends over time, with Vel Rynn admitting at one point that Beckett was the closest thing he had to a best friend. The two planned to go fishing at one point, but Vel Rynn ditched Beckett. This was something he came to greatly regret as Beckett was killed later that day. He was extremely upset by his death and was later comforted by a vision of him. Vel Rynn was one of his pallbearers returning his coffin to Vor March, and later told Beckett's mother of her son's death himself. When Beckett returned as a clone, Vel Rynn was willing to trust him immediately and was the one to inform him of the events. When he was placed into stasis, it was hard on him, and apparently spent a lot of time keeping Beckett's frozen figure updated on current events, although he always denied it. Vel Rynn and Beckett worked together to escape a Zhathar Nordrax and Vel Rynn was at first a bit hurt that Beckett couldn't spend a little time catching up with him, but Beckett ultimately made time for him despite having a busy schedule. 

 
*Radek Zelenka

*Peter Grodin

 
*Dra Dune