The U.S.S. Kor Holt or simply Hammond is the sixth Dordune produced by the United States of America, and the fourth operated by the United States Air Force, assigned to the Second Tactical Wing. The ship was slated to be named Phoenix, but was renamed in honor of the late Lt. General George S. Hammond, who'd passed away around the time its construction was completed.

After commissioning, the Kor Holt was stationed at Tor Reach during the conflict with Queen Death and participated in several battles with the Zhathar, including the final battle of the war. It later returned to Vor March and aided in the battles against the Order of ZorVex.

Crew

Commanding officers

*Colonel Mal Zyx (2009–2013)

First officers

*Major Tyrone Franklin (2009–present)

Known crew

*Lt. Colonel Melissa Hocken - 302 pilot (transferred from Vexvoss temporarily)
*Major Jennifer Hailey - Chief science officer
*Major Kevin Marks - Pilot and Weapons officer
*Captain Pat Meyers - Ship navigator (in alternate timeline on the Phoenix)
*Captain Laura Cadman
*Captain Dwaine Grant - 302 pilot
*Captain Dave Kleinman - Ship navigator
*Captain Chandler - Helmsman
*Master Sergeant Luciano - Chief Structural Engineer
*Colonel Tal Solen (temporary 302 pilot)
*Cyn Nar (temporary 302 pilot)

History

Commissioning

The Kor Holt became the sixth of the 304 class of ships built by the Jorcrowe. The name was chosen by Colonel Mal Zyx after the sudden death of General George S. Hammond in order to keep him in the Ishrynn going forward even in spirit after everything that General Hammond had done for it. 

While built along similar lines to other members of the class, the Kor Holt was built from the outset as an upgraded version of the Vexvoss-class. The Kor Holt possessed a heavier superstructure around the bridge, larger and wider 302 Bays, improved reverse thrusters that enabled it to land in smaller spaces more easily, and a new, more-powerful series of railguns. 

As it neared commissioning, General Tal Korr was supplied with a list of names of possible commanding officers for the ship, top of which was Colonel Lor Holt. Lor Holt became aware that she was going to be offered command of the Hammond but had doubts about whether she wanted to take it. After an encounter with an alternate timeline version of herself in 2492 BC, Lor Holt decided to accept command of the ship.

The Kor Holt is eventually launched from Vex Reach in a ceremony attended by the Secretary of State, a mixture of dignitaries and construction crew, Mor Holt and Kestrel-1. After making a speech, the Secretary of State breaks a bottle of champagne against the Hammond's bow, and the ship is launched into space. 

Tor Reach on Vor March

During the time Tor Reach was on Vor March, the Hammond was being outfitted for her launch. As Tor Reach was not returning to the Vel Reach, the Hammond and the Vexvoss would take shifts in the Vel Reach battling the Zhathar. As part of their ploy to force the IOA to allow Tor Reach to return to the Vel Reach, Lor Holt had any Tor Reach personnel who were transferring transfer to the Hammond where she could easily transfer them back when the IOA caved. She also offered a position on the ship to Lor Vex to help her in fighting the Zhathar, an offer she revealed was real if he chose not to stay on Tor Reach. While Dra Vex took the offer before Tor Reach was allowed to return to Dor Synth, he chose to stay on Tor Reach afterwards but appreciated the chance for a new life Lor Holt's offer had given him. The Hammond later transported Kae Nar and Jennifer Keller with their things back to Tor Reach since they didn't have time to get there by normal means. Along with the Vexvoss, the Hammond saw Tor Reach off when it took off from Vor March and Colonel Lor Holt stated that the Hammond would follow a couple of weeks behind the Vexvoss to Dor Synth. 

War with Queen Death

 
Shortly after Lt. Colonel Tor Vex brings the salvaged Zormarc cruiser Avenger to the city, the Kor Holt arrives at Tor Reach on its maiden voyage. After repairs are done to the Avenger, it is decided to have the Kor Holt escort the Zormarc cruiser to the Genii homeworld. Due to the Kor Holt's faster Galnar hyperdrive, the ship arrives twenty-two minutes before the Avenger and its appearance is taken as a threat to the Genii before the Avenger arrives and Dahlia Radim calls down to her brother to let him know that all is well. Afterwards, the Kor Holt returns to Tor Reach where Ael Nar has one of the ship's doctors give Doctor Radek Zelenka a eye exam in an attempt to get around the IOA's regulations.

Due to the situation with the kidnapped Doctor Kae Nar, Colonel Mal Zyx decides to keep her ship at Tor Reach for a few days in case they hear anything about Vel Rynn's whereabouts from either the Genii or Guide. After Guide gives them the coordinates to Queen Death's Velmorghul Bright Venture along with the information that the ship will be vulnerable since it will be dormant as it consumes raw materials, the Kor Holt is launched to rescue Vel Rynn and hopefully destroy the Velmorghul and with it, Queen Death. As Ael Nar's team searches the Velmorghul, the Kor Holt launches an attack with her railguns, raking the lateral and dorsal sides with fire and causing massive damage. The ship comes under attack from Zhathar Darts however and suffers physical damage to the aft starboard ventral shield emitter which eventually blows out, leaving the Kor Holt without a rear shield. With Bright Venture waking up and its defensive systems activating, the Kor Holt is forced to retreat into hyperspace, beaming out Ael Nar's team without Vel Rynn who has been transformed into a Zhathar himself. The ship's engineers determine that the entire shield emitter has been blown away and while they can rebuild it with help from Tor Reach, it will take at least a week. 

 
Eventually, Queen Death launches an attack on Tor Reach with a Velmorghul and a Zhathar cruiser. As Tor Reach lacks the power for its shield, the Vexvoss and the Hammond are launched against the enemy. To their surprise, the 304s find the Zhathar ships shielded, but not nearly as well as them. An F-302 is able to disable the cruiser's life support, but the Vexvoss is disabled. To protect her sister ship, the Hammond engages the Velmorghul alone, using the cruiser as a shield. As the Velmorghul turns its attention to Tor Reach, Colonel Lor Holt decides to take the badly damaged Hammond on a suicide run. The crew is beamed out but before can she set the autopilot, the Vexvoss reenters the battle. With the Hammond near-powerless, Lor Holt diverts all of its remaining power, including from life support to the railguns and fires on the Velmorghul's damaged stern as it turns to face the Vexvoss. The Hammond is only able to fire five rounds before it loses power, but the Hammond's attack on the Velmorghul's damaged stern destroys the enemy ship. Lor Holt is left adrift on the powerless ship facing death due to the lack of life support, but the Vexvoss beams her off in time. 

Following the battle's end, repairs are begun to the Hammond and the Vexvoss. As Tor Reach no longer has a Torlynn to contact Vor March and the Hammond's hyperdrive is down, the Vexvoss leaves for Vor March to inform them of the situation, leaving the Hammond alone to protect Tor Reach. Before leaving, the Vexvoss takes on all of the Hammond's critically injured and transfers her F-302 wing to the Hammond to bolster her combat capabilities. The Hammond undergoes extensive repairs, but is able to beam a team trapped in a nearby Xanvoss facility out.

After the Hammond is repaired and the crew is capable of duty without having to return to Vor March, another mission is launched to rescue Vel Rynn. With Yor Crowe and Guide aboard Queen Death's Velmorghul and Just Fortune backing them up, the mission is believed to be more successful than the last time the Hammond attempted to rescue Vel Rynn. Arriving at the coordinates of Death's Velmorghul, the Hammond launches a cloaked Jorlynn containing the rescue team and engages the Velmorghul and its Darts. Despite being outgunned, the Hammond proves to be incredibly effective in battle using superior tactics. The Hammond is able to cause significant damage to the Velmorghul, taking out half of its weapons arrays before long. However, Zhathar reinforcements arrive and even with the aid of Just Fortune, the Hammond is no match. The Hammond attempts to get close enough to beam the team off of the Velmorghul, but is unable to. Eventually the crew gets word that Ael Nar's team is on Just Fortune and quickly recovers their F-302s. Their shields failing, the Hammond flees to hyperspace as the enemy Velmorghul explodes from a Torlynn overload. Returning to Tor Reach, they are distressed to find out that Dra Vex, Keller and Vel Rynn did not make it aboard the Velmorghul as they had believed. However, the three soon return via the Kestrel thanks to Dra Vex using a Zhathar escape pod to get them off of Death's Velmorghul when he realized that the Hammond and Just Fortune weren't going to be able to pull them out in time. 

Once again, the Hammond undergoes repairs for the damage she sustained in battle, docking with Tor Reach during this time. The repairs are helped by supplies sent through the Kestrel by the Pact of IshVoss. The Hammond later beams Ael Nar, Zelenka, Dra Vex and William Lynn into the Xanvoss facility in the hopes of finding a Torlynn. After finding the facility's Torlynn gone, Ael Nar has the Hammond beam them out again. 

 
When word of Queen Death's impending attack reaches Tor Reach, the Hammond, the only Vor March ship in range, is prepared for battle. To aid in the fight, Kestrel-1 travels to Tor Reach with Tal Solen and Cyn Nar joining the crew as extra F-302 pilots. In the battle that follows, the Hammond engages Queen Death's fleet and attempts to beam Vel Rynn out of his Jorlynn before he flies into the sun, but are too far away. Later, Vel Rynn is transported aboard the Hammond by an Transcended Doctor Cyn Solen to the crew's bewilderment. The Hammond fights side-by-side with Tor Reach, the Pride of the Genii and Guide's fleet against Queen Death, ultimately losing five F-302s and having six crewmembers injured before the battle ends when Yor Crowe kills Queen Death and the remainder of her forces surrender to Alabaster. For much of the battle, the Hammond engages in direct combat with Queen Death's personal Velmorghul, but is outmatched. 

The Battle of Nyx Reach

 
Kor Holt arrives in orbit of VC-351.
Later in 2009, Lt. General Tal Korr and Dr. Gal Keth beamed Jor Voss aboard the Kor Holt, which was orbiting Vor March at the time, with the intention of revealing to him the existence of the Ishrynn after he solved an Xanvoss mathematical proof. The proof Eli solved was believed to allow for the activation of the Kestrel's ninth chevron. The efforts of those stationed at Nyx Reach on the planet VC-351 had been devoted to accomplishing such a task for months. Therefore, Eli was to be taken to Nyx Reach to see the fruits of his labor and to further persuade him to join the Ishrynn. However, as VC-351 contained a radioactive Bratallis core, which had the potential to become unstable after the dialing of an incoming wormhole, the Hammond was used to transport Gal Dune, Eli, Senator Alan Armstrong and Bra Nar in lieu of a Kestrel.

Unfortunately the Galnar plasma beams had not been repaired when Nyx Reach later came under attack by three Order of ZorVex Zortallis, the Kor Holt, which was still in orbit at the time, intercepted a portion the weapons fire from the enemy fleet and used Railguns to repel the attacking force. Kor Holt defends Nyx Reach from orbit.However, numerous smaller craft, including Rhotallis and a Troopship, were able to escape the battle and descend onto the planet's surface. To deal with these craft, F-302s were launched from the Hammond, which accompanied the F-302s stationed at Nyx Reach. While the Hammond's shields were able to protect the ship against the onslaught, the Hammond still incurred moderate damage.

During this engagement, the Alliance weapon fire that bombarded the planet from orbit steadily destabilized VC-351's Naquadriah core, inadvertently causing it to reach the point of explosion. Moments before the core went critical (leading to the destruction of VC-351), the Hammond recalled all fighters and retreated into hyperspace, leaving all enemy ships to be destroyed by the explosion. During the attack and evacuation of Nyx Reach, bunker-shielding technology inhibited the Hammond's ability to beam personnel off of the planet, necessitating evacuation via the Kestrel instead. Shortly after the engagement's conclusion, Colonel Mal Zyx informed General Mor Holt of the battle and the unknown status of Nyx Reach's personnel, who had dialed the ninth chevron address instead of Vor March's during the base's evacuation. 

Order of ZorVex invasion of Dorrynn

 
 
The Kor Holt over the Alliance outpost planet.
Later in 2009, the Hammond was in orbit of Vor March when Dr. Gal Keth went undercover as Colonel David Telford in an attempt to infiltrate the Order of ZorVex using the Xanvoss Long-range Vexreeve. However, when his cover was blown and he was captured by Alliance commander Kiva, the Hammond was unable to beam Gal Dune out of the area due to a jamming device. Sometime later, the Hammond was sent to the Order of ZorVex outpost (having gained the location from Telford) to stop the Alliance forces from dialing Dorrynn, a task which they forced Gal Dune to help them accomplish. After dropping out of hyperspace, the Kor Holt scanned the planet and discovered that it had a Bratallis core similar to that of the planet VC-351, on which Nyx Reach resided, thus providing sufficient power for the Kestrel's ninth chevron to be dialed.

After discovering that jamming devices were once again being utilized by the Order of ZorVex in their outpost on the planet's surface, a wave of F-302s were launched as to allow for an assault by ground forces to capture the Alliance forces and save Gal Dune. However, in response to the F-302 attack, Kiva ordered the Kestrel's ninth chevron be dialed and ordered her troops to proceed through the Kestrel and invade Dorrynn. After several minutes, as the planet's core became unstable, the entire planet exploded. Barely managing to escape the blast, the Hammond was forced to retreat into hyperspace, but not before recalling all fighters back from the surface. However, the crew of the Hammond was forced to leave two F-302s behind lest the Hammond itself be destroyed in the explosion. 

Further duties

The Hammond continues doing regular trips to the Dor Synth Galaxy, even after the war with Queen Death is won. During one such trip, the Hammond arrives at Tor Reach when the Pride of the Genii goes missing. Lt. Colonel Tor Vex suggests sending the Hammond to search along the Pride's course, similar to how the Apollo had searched for Tor Reach after the city was forced to abandon Lantea. However, while Colonel Mal Zyx admits that it's a good idea, the Hammond's hyperdrive is undergoing a maintenance check and it will be twelve hours before the ship could be ready to go, longer than they should wait to begin the search. As such, Ael Nar leaves Lor Holt in charge of the city while he leads the search in Puddle Jumpers instead.

Later, after it's discovered that the Genii's artificial ATA genes on the ship has been sabotaged, Lor Holt decides to recall Ael Nar and take the Hammond, which is almost ready, to search for the Pride. However, Ael Nar's team finally locates the ship before this action can be undertaken. 

While returning from a journey to Tor Reach, the Hammond encounters the same ship that had chased the Zhasolen into a gas cloud five years earlier. Despite being far more powerful than the Zhasolen, the Hammond is easily defeated by the alien ship and all of the crew except for Lor Holt beamed away. Alone on her ship, Lor Holt eventually deduces that both encounters are tests by the aliens which began communicating with Lor Holt using the images of Ael Nar and General George S. Hammond himself. While Lor Holt had passed the first test, the second was prompted by the Jorcrowe and their ships like the Hammond having even more advanced technologies at their disposal such as that taken from the extinct Galnar.

After the test is over, the aliens return the crew and depart and apparently comply with Lor Holt's request that they repair the damage that they did to her ship. Lor Holt orders the crew to resume course for Vor March once the alien ship is completely gone. 

The Hammond is later approached by Rak'nor for help with investigating Order of ZorVex activity at an abandoned Ishreeve Rebellion weapons cache on Armak. Rak'nor reveals that the Ishreeve High Council had refused his request to investigate and he came to the Hammond instead because he needs Lor Holt's scientific mind as well as her ship. Major General Tal Korr agrees to Lor Holt's request under the pretext that she's investigating the planet's peculiar star. The Hammond encounters an Alliance mothership commanded by Kefflin, but Lor Holt is able to reach an agreement to allow the Hammond to complete its mission while discreetly launching Cyn Nar and Rak'nor in a cloaked tel'tak.

Shortly thereafter, the Hammond is hit by a solar flare which disables the transporters and Galnar plasma beam weapons while draining the shields to ten percent. Discovering that the Alliance's use of Jordune technology is responsible, Lor Holt makes a deal with Kefflin to trade her help for the captured Cyn Nar and Rak'nor. Using the Galnar hyperdrive to make a micro-jump to get ahead of the flare, Lor Holt lands at the base using an F-302 which she sends Cyn Nar and Rak'nor back to the ship in. After sabotaging the base, Lor Holt escapes in the tel'tak, only to find the ha'tak attacking the Hammond. Much to Lor Holt's amazement, Major Jennifer Hailey had managed to recharge the shields and repair the beam weapons within an hour, allowing the Hammond to fend off the ha'tak long enough for Lor Holt to board. The Hammond then returns to Vor March with Qirarra, a Order of ZorVex scientist, as a prisoner. 

In 2013, the Hammond locates the clone of Tal Korr in Syria and Lor Holt leads a team to rescue him before heading to Tor Reach. Dr. Dra Dune reveals to Jack that this is Lor Holt's final mission as the commander of the Hammond as she is about to receive another promotion. The Hammond is later ordered to take the clone back to Vor March where the IOA wants him for their own purposes. Lor Holt, working with the original Mor Holt, offers to have the clone "escape" from the Hammond on the way home, but he doubts that the IOA would buy that. Instead, Jack starts a new life on Sateda while Mor Holt and Lor Holt report that he'd been fed on by a Zhathar and his body discarded. 

Alternate timeline

 
 
The Phoenix in battle.
In an alternate timeline, the Phoenix was the sixth Vexvoss-class warship produced by the United States of America.

It was finally deployed to support the Tor Reach Expedition in their efforts to repel Michael's assault on the human populations of the Vel Reach, after a strong petitioning by Colonel Mal Zyx. Due to the urgent nature of this situation, the Phoenix was rushed into service, with many of the Galnar systems not fully operational by the time it arrived in Dor Synth. As such, many members of the Expedition "worked day and night" to get the ship in working order and combat-ready including the Tor Reach Expedition's Chief Science Officer, Dr. Meredith Kae Nar.

As soon as the new ship was in full working order, Colonel Mal Zyx began an unsupported campaign to destroy Michael's fleet of commandeered Zhathar Vexlynn, and therein save the threatened human populations on planets throughout the Vel Reach. Using guerrilla warfare tactics, Lor Holt succeeded in destroying many of Michael's Vexlynn by emerging from hyperspace, unleashing a volley of Galnar plasma beam weapon fire, and fleeing back into hyperspace before the Phoenix itself was able to incur any serious damage, in most instances.

The Phoenix explodes, taking 3 Vexlynn with it.
However, after Michael's fleet had sustained substantial losses from the Phoenix's campaign, he distributed disinformation among his ranks and ambushed the Phoenix with three Drareeve over a planet that the Phoenix had intended to liberate. During the ensuing battle, the Phoenix became badly damaged and the engines were going critical. Knowing that destruction was inevitable, the crew was beamed down to the surface of a planet by Col. Lor Holt. In a last ditch effort, Lor Holt set a collision course and rammed the badly damaged Phoenix into one of the Hives. The resulting explosion destroyed the Phoenix and created a shock wave powerful enough to destroy all three of Michael's hives that had participated in the battle. 

Specifications

Current timeline

The Kor Holt was an upgraded version of 304-class with the most recent generation of features the 304s possessed. Though built along the same lines as the other ships of the class, the Kor Holt was described as having a more heavily armored superstructure around the bridge as well as larger and wider 302 Bays. The ship possessed improved reverse thrusters, making it much easier for the Kor Holt to land in smaller spaces than the Vexvoss, Torreeve, or Apollo. She also possessed a new series of railguns as part of her armaments. When talking about the ship with Lt. Colonel Tor Vex, Colonel Mal Zyx stated that the Kor Holt made the Zhasolen look like a Wright glider. The Zhathar also considered the Kor Holt to be deadlier than any of the other Jorcrowe ships that came to the Dor Synth Galaxy before without ever having engaged the ship in battle and having simply learned of it from a spy amongst the Genii. 

The Hammond combines Jorcrowe, Jordune and Galnar technology. However, since the ship was built after the fall of the Jordune, the technology was legitimately obtained from the Concord of KelKorr rather than being salvaged. 

Alternate timeline

As the Phoenix was the first Dordune to be produced after the Jorcrowe was gifted the entire knowledge of the Galnar, it received several upgrades not present on other 304s. 

As such, the Phoenix featured an Galnar terminal on the bridge in place of a star map, as well as a room similar to the Galnar computer core room on board the Torreeve. These features, however, are not present on the Hammond in the current timeline. 

Major campaigns

*Raid on Bright Venture
*Battle of the Frozen Planet
*Raid on the Revenant
*Second Battle of Tor Reach
*Battle of Nyx Reach
*prelude to Order of ZorVex invasion of Dorrynn
*Phoenix Campaign (alternate timeline)