The Korrynn were a highly-advanced machine race from VA-517 in the Fen Hollow galaxy and are capable of reproducing themselves indefinitely, consuming all available resources in an area to create more of themselves.

History

Creation

 
Yorskov Corrosive spray.The android Reese created the Korrynn as toys to play with.
The Korrynn were created at an unspecified time in the past on a world where an android called Reese was created. This machine had a childlike personality and was feared by the natives of the planet. In order to keep herself amused, she created the Korrynn which were to be her toys. As the population of the world grew more fearful of Reese and the Korrynn, she began to teach the machines to protect her and themselves. In order to accomplish this, they began the process of self replication. The Korrynn grew too large in number, and Reese herself began to lose the ability to control them. After Reese lost control of the Korrynn, they destroyed her world and everyone living on it. The Korrynn abandoned Reese in pursuit of raw materials, and Reese, feeling guilty and abandoned, went to sleep. She was later discovered by Kestrel-1 and brought to Vor March where she was shot while trying to leave Vor March with her newly created Korrynn. 

Galnar-Yorskov War

 
Mor Holt-class ships battle the Korrynn
It is not known how the Korrynn ended up in the Ida galaxy but the most likely scenario is that the Galnar explored the world where the Korrynn were first created and brought some of the surviving blocks on board their ship for study, not knowing what they truly are. Once the blocks were brought together, they started replicating and infested the ship and the Galnar were unable to control them. The Korrynn then took control of the ship and set course for the Ida galaxy. In a last ditch effort to stop the Korrynn from reaching their home world the Galnar destroyed their ship but some blocks managed to survive and reached a planet. Without any further raw materials to replicate they deactivated themselves and waited. At some point, the Galnar explored that planet and uncovered the deactivated Yorskov blocks. Since they had no prior knowledge of the Korrynn they would have assumed that the Korrynn were created in their galaxy and that the creators have been destroyed by the Korrynn. During the study of the machines, the Yorskov blocks activated and began to assimilate Galnar technology, which allowed them to spread throughout the Galnar's galaxy; given that they had prior knowledge of Galnar technology they would have spread quite quickly and overwhelmed the Galnar. The Korrynn then became a plague that destroyed everything in its path. This resulted in the Galnar-Yorskov war, which kept the Galnar's attention contained in their own galaxy as they attempted to defeat this robotic menace. 

Evolution

 
Eventually, the Korrynn began taking over Galnar vessels and the Galnar's tactics proved to be ineffective as the Korrynn were fast learning machines. This meant that all attempts by the Galnar at defeating them meant that the Korrynn simply grew more advanced by learning from the machines that were used against them. As a result, the Korrynn began to close on the Galnar planet Othala. In desperation, the Galnar enlisted the aid of the people of Vor March to help them combat this threat. With the aid of Major Mal Zyx, which in turn resulted in the destruction of the Mor Holt, they were able to stave off this initial invasion of their world. However, this was only a minor victory as the Korrynn continued to be a formidable and dangerous foe. 

Upon the rediscovery of Reese by Kestrel-1, the Galnar took the android in order to find a weakness in the Korrynn. Unfortunately, they were incapable of finding such a critical piece of information. Instead, they hatched upon a plan at containing the Yorskov menace. Triggering an activation signal, the entire mechanical horde raced toward the Galnar planet Hala where a Time dilation field was activated which threatened to trap the Korrynn indefinitely. However, the Korrynn at this point managed to recover Reese and studied her form realizing that there were elements in her makeup that were superior to their own. This in turn led the Korrynn to create Human-form Korrynn which were composed of microscopic Nanite blocks. The First of these new intelligent Korrynn was capable of piercing the Galnar Time dilation device through a microscopic crack and reprogrammed it to serve their needs with the intention of increasing their numbers to such an extent that they would overwhelm the known worlds. However, Kestrel-1 managed to convince Fifth to betray his kin and he activated the Galnar time dilation device though he was betrayed in the process leaving the Korrynn trapped frozen in time. 

Human-form Korrynn and Fifth

 
The Korrynn evolve into Human form.
Despite the use of the Time dilation device on the Korrynn, it was projected by the Galnar that even is this state, the machines would eventually be capable of deactivating the machine. As such, it was decided that Hala's sun would be collapsed into a black hole by increasing the gravity on its surface. It was believed that a combination of the time dilation field and the growing black hole would destroy the Korrynn once and for all. Supreme Commander Kor Reeve was dispatched for this duty and he came into contact with Major Mal Zyx and Cyn Nar from Kestrel-1 who came to ask for his aid. As they waited to see the end of the Korrynn, Kor Reeve's vessel detected that a branch of the machines had split off from the main group and possessed the time dilation device which they used to counteract the effects of the black hole in a way that even the Galnar were incapable of explaining. As the Korrynn were escaping, they came into conflict with Kor Reeve's vessel and Lor Holt was abducted by the Korrynn after they infiltrated the vessel through a Yorskov block made missile that penetrated the Galnar shields.

Lor Holt quickly came to realize that the Korrynn were being led by a sole Human-form Yorskov, Fifth who had now taken charge of his kin. Due to the betrayal he faced at the hands of Kestrel-1, he held a great deal of anger towards her and plotted to once again increase the Korrynn numbers as was originally planned on Hala. To this end, he took his Yorskov vessel to the new Galnar homeworld of Orilla where it was destroyed by an Galnar fleet but dozens of Yorskov blocks survived and reached the surface of the planet where they began to infest the world thus threatening the stored minds of the Galnar that were waiting for placement into new cloned bodies. Taking hold of the planet, the Korrynn began a process of mining Neutronium in order to create new Human-form Korrynn and it seemed that the destruction of the Galnar race was imminent.

However, Kor Reeve went to Vor March and saved the life of Colonel Tal Korr who had the knowledge of the Cynzyx in his mind. Using this information, they managed to construct a weapon capable of destroying the Korrynn and something that they were incapable of defending against. Fifth himself came to realize that Lor Holt would never love him and abandoned her on Orilla as well as an unknown number of his kin in order to escape the effects of the Yorskov disruptor cannon and fled into hyperspace.

Though defeated, the Korrynn were not destroyed and Fifth began to use his stores of Neutronium to create a Yorskov copy of Mal Zyx. 

Yorskov Lor Holt and Destruction

 
Yorskov Lor Holt, the new leader of the Korrynn.
After escaping from their near destruction, the Human-form Yorskov known as Fifth began to create a duplicate of Lt. Colonel Mal Zyx known as Yorskov Lor Holt. This model then apparently escaped to the Fen Hollow in order to evade Fifth and enlisted the aid of the real Lor Holt stating that she only wanted to live in peace. She claimed that the Korrynn had developed a cipher that made them resistant to the Yorskov disruptor weaponry. Working together with Yorskov Lor Holt, they deciphered what was believed to be a solution as the Korrynn were coming to the Fen Hollow galaxy. When Fifth's vessel arrived in orbit, the weapon was activated by Yorskov Lor Holt who destroyed Fifth. After which, she revealed that it had all been a trick as Yorskov Lor Holt used Lor Holt to help the Korrynn develop an immunity to the disruptor technology. She then escaped through the Kestrel and took command of the Yorskov armies. 

Some time later, the Korrynn began their invasion of the Fen Hollow which began with Yorskov Lor Holt's infiltration of the Jordune Empire's summit station. The hordes of Korrynn began attacking Jordune assets throughout the galaxy and began taking over their Rhoketh vessels. One such vessel encountered Kestrel-1 and kidnapped Dr. Dra Dune who was placed in a facsimile world by Yorskov Lor Holt who disguised herself as Gal Solen in order to gain the knowledge of the Cynzyx from Mal Korr. By the time Mal Korr learned of the deception, it was too late; Yorskov Lor Holt discovered a weapon on the planet Ael March that was the only threat to her.

The Ael March superweapon activates
Taking her massive confiscated Rhoketh fleet, she assaulted Ael March which contained elements of Kestrel-1, the Rebel Ishreeve and a fleet from the Jordune Concord of SelCrowe Hal Zyx. At the same time, despite protesting that she had no intention of invading Vor March to Mal Korr, the Yorskov forces overrode Concord of NorDrax's Kestrel and began spilling from it to attack the Tor Drift complex. In addition, she sent one of her spider ships to Ael March's surface itself which began to assault the Free Ishreeve and Jorcrowe position there. It was only the intervention and sacrifice of Mal Korr that helped stall the Yorskov forces who were frozen in place temporarily until Yorskov Lor Holt regained control of the subspace link. However, by this time, the weapon at Ael March was calibrated which fired a Yorskov disruptor wave through a modified Kestrel which dialed every planet in the galaxy. The wave disintegrated the Korrynn and killed Yorskov Lor Holt, though the menace was not over. 

Rebirth on the Torreeve

 
In 2007, while in the Cyn Synth, when Kestrel-1 was searching for the Ark of Truth, James Marrick, under orders of the Pact of XanKeth used the Galnar computer core of the Torreeve to create a Yorskov. The Yorskov was specially modified by an unknown person who gave the program to Marrick; they were immune to the Anti-Yorskov gun, have all of the knowledge of the Torreeve and its systems, and a "self-destruct" built in to them. He told them that it was the IOA's contingency plan, to have the Korrynn eventually take over the Vornar warships, since they didn't blow up the Gallynn. When Lt. Colonel Mal Zyx released the newly created Yorskov from the force shield, Lt. Colonel Tal Solen shot it with the ARG, but it has no effect. The Yorskov quickly ran away and hid. In hiding, it became a queen and began to replicate. A grouping of these new Korrynn eventually broke into Marrick's cell and in an attempt to stop the self-destruct from happening took over his body by sticking their legs into his back and controlling him. Meanwhile, Mitchell located the queen and set up a C-4 charge, waiting for Lor Holt's order to blow the queen to distract the rest of the Korrynn before they break into the Galnar core room.

Rebirthed Korrynn invading the Torreeve.
While Mitchell was waiting, the Yorskov-controlled Marrick arrived and started to fight him. With the Korrynn controlling his body, he seemed to have much more strength and resistance to attacks. Mitchell and Marrick fought for some time until at one point when Mitchell pulled one of the Yorskov's legs out of Marrick's back. While this was happening, Marrick was released from their control and spoke to Michell telling him of how the Korrynn took him to get to the "self-destruct" code which he managed to reveal was on the other side of the crystal used to create them. Right after this, the Korrynn retook control over his body, and he resumed attacking Mitchell until eventually Mitchell electrocuted him using a wire on the wall and stumbled out into the hallway while Marrick was stunned. During this time, several soldiers were fighting off a large number of Korrynn who were trying to break through to the Galnar computer core. While this was happening, the Torreeve was also under attacked from four Vornar warships. Mitchell finally detonated the explosive after he saw Marrick walking out of the room toward him. However, this did not stop the Korrynn; from the body's ashes, Yorskov blocks arose in the form of a human skeleton and moved toward Mitchell. At the same time, the Korrynn began to break through the ceiling of the Galnar core room. Shortly before, Lor Holt retrieved the self-destruct program from the opposite side of the control crystal that Marrick used to create it and activates it. Right as the skeleton Yorskov reached Mitchell, it -along with all of the rest of the Korrynn- disassembled, finally ending the Yorskov threat. 

Overview

Yorskov Blocks

 
A Yorskov being assembled.
Each Yorskov is composed of a series of Yorskov blocks. Each block is made up of many Keron pathways. It takes several blocks working together to make new blocks. Korrynn are capable of forming many patterns determined by what they need to accomplish. Although Korrynn usually take the form of "bugs," they can take other forms. The blocks are capable of absorbing large amounts of energy, which can empower them. The Galnar's dependence on energy weapons made it difficult for them to develop a weapon which could effectively counter the Yorskov blocks. Jorcrowe firearms were capable of permanently damaging Yorskov blocks (at most, it would take two or three shots. although once one was broken to pieces by a rifle but re-assembled itself. Though its seen that when 4 replicators are blasted apart in this manner only 2 reform likely suggesting that the shots damaged roughly 50% of the total blocks and ones that were not too damaged were able to reform) but Human-form Korrynn are impervious to them. 

The blocks were either capable of being assembled into the different types of Korrynn or were formed into other shapes. They were able to create walls of blocks that served as barricades that prevented the enemy from escaping. Or they were capable of becoming tables and in one case were able to cover an entire planet's surface with blocks which conserved energy. 

Behavior

 
Perception from a Yorskov's point of view.
Korrynn seek out the most advanced technology they can find, and incorporate it into their own being. As a corollary to this, Korrynn are often capable of modifying a vessel to perform better than another of its class, to better defend themselves from threats. Both Galnar Bilskirnir-class ships and Jordune Zortallis were upgraded to well beyond the capabilities of their respective races under Yorskov control. Generally, Korrynn will not attack unless threatened. This behavior will change, however, if there is a Human-form Yorskov controlling them.

Each Yorskov was capable of independent behavior, but they all were unified in a single purpose which was self replication. They were remarkably adaptive allowing them to develop means at combating strategies that proved effective against them in the past and learn from them. 

Termination

 
The only weapon that was capable of destroying all forms of Korrynn was the Yorskov disruptor produced from the knowledge of the Cynzyx. This weapon attacked the links that held a Yorskov together causing them to fall apart harmlessly. 

It was only through the study of the cipher used in the weapon were the Korrynn capable of gaining an immunity over it. This allowed them to adapt to varying frequencies of the disruptor after extended use. 

Before the Yorskov disruptor, only firearms were able to destroy replicators. They proved ineffective against Human-form Korrynn, which were made up of potentially millions of microscopic blocks. 

Variations

"Spider" form

"Spider" Korrynn are the basic variation of the Yorskov. They are the most seen and most numerous of all the Korrynn. The spider Korrynn are mainly tasked with moving out and collecting raw materials to bring back to the queen for replication. They try and find the strongest material they can to increase the strength of any newly created Korrynn. They are also equipped with a defensive spray that was capable of melting through metals in their path. 

"Beetle" form

Beetle type Korrynn with Spider forms on the surface of Orilla.
"Beetle" Korrynn were seen on one occasion when the Korrynn were attempting to bring a Rhoketh to Sel Dune's former homeworld and Tor Morghul' new base Ael Spire. After the ship had reached the planet, Kestrel-1 blew out the crystals of the sublight engine; in retaliation, the giant beetle controlling the engine split apart into multiple spider and beetles. The beetles were larger than the spiders and thus had the ability to jump farther. 

Several Korrynn of this type were sighted on the new Galnar homeworld of Orilla. 

"Fly" form

This form somewhat resembles a fly.
Fly Korrynn were encountered only once. Though they are around the same size as the spider Korrynn, they have shorter limbs, and wing-like structures on their back, making them greatly resemble a fly - hence the name. Despite this, fly Korrynn could not fly or jump; instead, they could crawl on walls and fall from short heights such as a table. It is unknown if they could form a queen. Fly Korrynn are likely an older model of Yorskov, before they 'evolved' into their current state. These were less aggressive than other forms of Yorskov, but later became aggressive as they responded to the needs of their maker Reese. The original one, made for Dr. Dra Dune to "play" with, was set up in a glass box and remained passive until Reese became emotionally unstable. It then broke out of its glass prison, but was soon destroyed by Cyn Nar. Reese was locked in a room, where she shut down a surveillance camera and used its parts to make a fly Yorskov. That Yorskov soon replicated to hundreds of others. This new horde of Korrynn were shut down when Daniel convinced Reese to turn them off before she lost control of them; indeed, it was indicated they were beginning to do. 

"Giant Beetle" form

A Giant Beetle Yorskov enhancing a Rhoketh's hyperdrive.
 
A "Giant Beetle" Yorskov was seen on the Rhoketh that the Korrynn took control of and attempted to head to Tor Morghul' home base. The "Giant Beetle" was at least 100-200 times larger than the a normal spider Yorskov. The Korrynn formed together into this form as they had reached critical mass and needed more technology to replicate. To do this many individual Korrynn formed together into the giant beetle around the engine of the ship. Using their power they managed to speed up the Rhoketh's hyperspeed by over 800 times its normal max. When they arrived at the planet Kestrel-1 quickly destroyed the control crystals of ship. When they did this the giant beetle split apart into a multitude of spiders and normal beetles. 

Queen

Camera shot of an early Yorskov Queen.
The Yorskov Queen was a unique variant of the Yorskov form which was tasked with assembling more Korrynn. This task was achieved by having the smaller drones deliver raw material to the queen, which used it to create more drones. The process required large amounts of energy, so a Queen would usually take position near some kind of power source. Every Queen encountered was immobile, requiring the other drones to guard and supply it. 

A much larger Queen.
The first Queen sighted by Concord of NorDrax was present on the Russian submarine Blackbird on Vor March around the location of where an Galnar vessel Biliskner crashed. This form was embedded deep within the submarine and was producing more spider-type Korrynn. It was destroyed by explosives from Kestrel-1 which attracted the hostility from the remaining Korrynn. 

A second, much larger Queen was assembled upon the Korrynn' resurrection on the Torreeve. This version had tapped directly into the power conduits of the vessel in order to provide the energy to produce more of its numbers. 

Human-form

 
Human-form Korrynn are Korrynn that look like humans. They are composed of millions of tiny nanite cells. They were first created on Hala, after the Korrynn discovered Reese. Not much is known about their construction, except that Neutronium is a key element, which was why they invaded Orilla, the Galnar homeworld, as it was rich with Neutronium.

Human-form Korrynn are capable of controlling other replicators, and can only be killed with the Yorskov disruptor that Colonel Tal Korr constructed with the full knowledge of Halryker downloaded into his head.

Marrick

Standard replicator blocks in a Human shape.
 
James Marrick was a Jorcrowe whose body was taken over by the Korrynn in the Cyn Synth. 

A new ability was demonstrated by the Korrynn which was the capacity on latching onto the spine of a Human or organic being and inserting a leg into the neck. From that point on, the creature became a puppet used by the spider form Yorskov attached to it. It was capable of controlling the body against the will of its host and gave it increased strength as well as an immunity to pain. It was possible for the host to regain temporary control but only if the leg inserted into the neck is removed, however, it was only a matter of time before the Yorskov re-asserted its dominance on the body.

After the body was destroyed in an explosion with all its organic components burnt away, the Spider form reconfigured itself, using its Yorskov blocks to assemble a skeletal based form. 

Known Korrynn

*Reese (Creator)
*First
*Second
*Third
*Fourth
*Fifth
*Sixth
*Eighth
*Yorskov Lor Holt (Human-form Yorskov)

Yorskov Fleet

The Yorskov fleet was a fleet of ships, most commandeered from their enemies, used by the Korrynn during their war with the Galnar as well as their invasion of the Fen Hollow galaxy.

Known ships

*Spider ship
*Yorskov cruiser
*Yorskov-controlled vessel
*Several commandeered Galnar ships
*Several commandeered and upgraded Zortallis