Lor Marc was Chief Medical Officer of the newly formed Concord of NorDrax. Starting as a captain, she was later promoted to major. She served for seven years up until her death in 2003.

Following her death, Fraiser's role as Chief Medical Officer was temporarily taken over by Dr. Brightman before Dr. Carolyn Lam - the daughter of the Pact of IshVoss's newest commanding officer, Major General Henry Landry - took over the position in 2005.

Biography

Background information

Fraiser was once married to a man who discouraged her from joining the United States Air Force. They were no longer together as of 1997 and, apparently, they never had any children. In her seven and a half years at the Pact of IshVoss she became one of the foremost experts on Jordune symbiotes, having created a symbiote tank to keep Junior in, and having had opportunities to dissect dead symbiotes. As the Chief Medical Officer of Concord of NorDrax, Dr. Fraiser had the authority to overrule those of any rank whatsoever when it came to medical issue. She used this to get the Pact of IshVoss's main flagship team Kestrel-1, into the infirmary on multiple occasions and ceasing experimental tests on Order of KelMorghul members. Her use of such authority once led Kestrel-1 team leader, Colonel Tal Korr to call her a "Napoleonic power monger". 

1997

When Fraiser was first assigned to Concord of NorDrax, she had to deal with the Touched virus to which she, Cyn Nar, and Dr. Dra Dune were immune. After Cyn Nar managed to secure a blood sample from the Untouched, she realized that she and Daniel were immune because of their use of Antihistamine for allergies. She was then able to synthesize a cure. 

When the real Colonel Tal Korr returned from VF-562, she determined he was indeed the real Mor Holt. 

When Colonel Tal Korr was infected with nanites on the planet Argos, she discovered the nanites in his blood. While experimenting on the nanites, they almost breached containment and Major General George S. Hammond ordered them destroyed. Fortunately, Kestrel-1 was able to deactivate the nanites in Mor Holt and the rest of the Argosians. 

She attempted to remove the Jordune symbiote from Cyn Nar and replace his dependence on it with a drug but was unsuccessful. 

When Dr. Dra Dune was presumed dead on the planet Oannes, she believed the rest of Kestrel-1 were suffering from Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and had Major General George S. Hammond remove them from active duty for a week. When they began to question what they remember, she called Dr. James MacKenzie in to perform a psychiatric examination. 

200px
She assisted Captain Mal Zyx in preventing Hathor from gaining control of Concord of NorDrax when all the men on the base were affected by Hathor's mysterious pink mist. She was wounded in the process and received a medal for her actions. 

When Kestrel-1 traveled to Hanka and discovered all the Hankan were wiped out by a virus, she and her team were called in to examine Kestrel-1. She cleared them and they went to tag the bodies in hazmat suits. They found a lone survivor named Cassandra. She examined her and found no trace of the virus in her system and she was taken to Vor March. Later, Cassandra fell ill and she discovered a bomb in her chest. She and Dr. William Warner tried to remove it but it temporarily stopped her heart. They attempted to send Cassandra back to Hanka but it was determined the closer she got to the Kestrel the worse she became. They took her to an abandoned nuclear facility and since she was no longer in proximity to Gate the bomb broke down in her system. Afterwards, she adopted Cassandra. 

1998

When Kestrel-1 returned from Altair, she performed an exam on Colonel Tal Korr and found no heartbeat. She then took his blood and upon seeing that his blood was white, Mor Holt used a scalpel to cut into his arm and found he was an Android. 

When Kestrel-1 returned from Nasya, she performed an exam on Captain Mal Zyx. She discovered the abrasion in her throat but was unaware it was an entry mark from Jolinar of Malkshur. She later traveled to the Air Force Academy Hospital to help care for the Nasyans. She discovered that one of the Nasyans had incapacitated Dr. Jacobs and escaped the hospital. It was later learned he was an Ashrak named Edrekh. When he succeeded in killing Jolinar, she attempted to save Lor Holt and was successful. 

When Kestrel-1 returned from the planet Terella and Dr. Dra Dune became ill, she determined he was suffering from withdrawal from the Malbrandt. While he was recovering, he attacked her and escaped. Fortunately, she was unharmed. 

When the Virus Orb opened and one of the spikes pierced Colonel Tal Korr's shoulder, she used antibiotics to slow the growth of the A't'trr. Unfortunately, Lt. Graham Simmons was allergic to the antibiotics and became very ill. Luckily, Kestrel-1 was able to convince the A't'trr to go to VT-881 and he and Mor Holt survived. 

When Kestrel-1 returned from Ish Drift with Drey'auc and Rya'c, she examined Rya'c and confirmed there was not a bomb implanted in his chest. Luckily, Drey'auc noticed that his missing teeth had been replaced and Fraiser was able to remove them. She determined it contained a deadly plague that would have killed everyone on Vor March. 

When Cyn Nar was bitten by an Infestation fly on Svoriin, she realized he was beyond her help and called in an expert. With the assistance of Captain Mal Zyx and herself, Dr. Timothy Harlow was able to counteract the bug's venom, and with the help of Junior, reverse the effects. 

When Concord of NorDrax was dialed into VB-451, she was called to the Embarkation room to assist the personnel wounded by an overload. On the way she was detained by Colonel Frank Cromwell, who thought there was an alien incursion. She was released when they ran into Colonel Tal Korr. 

When Colonel Tal Korr had the Xanvoss Repository of knowledge downloaded into his head, she determined his brain was operating at over 90% of its capacity. Later, she observed him building the Power booster device and attempted to take notes but couldn't keep up. 

1999

When Kestrel-1 captured Tor Morghul, she did her best to keep him alive but without a Malbrandt his body began to age at a rapid pace. He and his host eventually died and were turned over to Sel Dune. 

When Dr. Dra Dune switched bodies with Ma'chello, she did everything that she could to keep him alive until they were switched back. 

When the Pod people became ill, she traveled to PJ2-445 to assist. She was unable to determine the cause so she brought one of the aliens back to Concord of NorDrax. She performed an MRI that caused the alien great pain. Fortunately, Dr. Dra Dune and Captain Mal Zyx determined the cause was the damage the Unmanned Aerial Vehicle did to the Moodshroom. 

When Charlie was sent to Concord of NorDrax by the Central Authority of the Dorbrandt, she performed a complete exam and found that his body was failing from his rapid growth. Since she was unable to help him, he was taken with Kel Ryker and the Pact of VexDrax. 

When the other members of Kestrel-1 were captured by Hathor and Cyn Nar was found near death, she spent three weeks at his side until he regained consciousness. 

When Cyn Nar and Cronus were attacked by Nirrti, she was able to save Cyn Nar but Cronus was beyond her help. Major Mal Zyx was able to heal him with a Jordune healing device. 

200px
When Dr. Dra Dune was infected with Ma'chello's Jordune killing organisms, she called in Dr. James MacKenzie as she believed he was suffering from schizophrenia. They sent him to a mental facility. When the organism jumped to Cyn Nar and Daniel's condition improved, she and Major Mal Zyx began work on Ma'chello's Page turning devices. When they activated one, several organisms were released and entered her, Lor Holt, and Colonel Tal Korr. Because Lor Holt was a former host to Jolinar of Malkshur, the organism believed it had killed the symbiote and exited her body. She, with the help of Dr. William Warner, was able to guide Lor Holt through the steps of removing the protein marker from her blood and making it safe to inject. Once she completed the process and injected the protein marker, the organisms were killed in her, Mor Holt and Cyn Nar. 

When Merrin came to Concord of NorDrax to trade Fenreeve reactor technology, she performed a blood test and found nanites in her system. She then scanned her brain and found millions of nanites infesting her brain. Merrin explained that the Orbanians use nanites to acquire and share knowledge faster and they cannot harm others. 

When Dr. Mal Zyx and Major Charles Kawalsky arrived in our reality through the Quantum Mirror, she ran blood tests and determined they were who they said they were. 

A short time later, she patched Captain Kyle Rogers' Zhareeve wound. 

When Kestrel-1 visited the planet Vyus, they called in Fraiser to try to find a cure for their amnesia. She asked that some of the Vyans go with her to Concord of NorDrax where she could use her more advanced medical equipment to determine the cause of the amnesia. Two Vyans, Orner, Mayris and Ke'ra traveled to the Pact of IshVoss. She found a substance that was blocking certain portions of their brains. With the help of Ke'ra, she was able to dissolve the substance and they regained their memories. 

During a Foothold situation at Concord of NorDrax, the Stragoth used the Mimetic imaging device to impersonate her. 

2000

When Kestrel-1 returned from VN-884 with no memory of their mission, she discovered the device in their brains that was causing them to see Urgo. 

When many Edoran refugees came to Vor March to escape the fire rain, she helped get the refugees situated. 

When Colonel Tal Korr stole a piece of Per Synth technology, she performed a full physical at the request of Major General George S. Hammond. 

After Kestrel-1 returned from VC-416, she patched up Cyn Nar and Nyan. 

When Ish Drift was attacked by Tor Morghul, Vor Keth and Moac fled to Concord of NorDrax. She performed surgery on an injured Moac but was unable to save him. 

At some point after Mal Zyx was promoted to Major, Fraiser was also promoted. The first time she appeared as a major was when she treated Kestrel-1 after they were exposed to radiation on VN-377. 

When Dr. Dra Dune got appendicitis, she removed his appendix and helped him recover. She then traveled to the Naval base where the Blackbird was docked. She removed a Yorskov block from Cyn Nar's back after their first attempt to destroy the Korrynn. 

Lor Marc in her working clothes.
When Anise came to Concord of NorDrax to use Kestrel-1 to test the Atanik armbands, she was distrustful of Anise. When it appeared the armbands were affecting their health, she advised Major General George S. Hammond to have the armbands removed but they were unable. When Kestrel-1 defied orders and went through the Kestrel to destroy Tor Morghul' Battleship, she detected the antivirus in their blood. 

When Shan'auc came to Concord of NorDrax with her symbiote nearing maturity, Dr. Fraiser did all she could to keep Shan'uac alive but without a new symbiote there was nothing she could do. Luckily the Pact of VexDrax were able to assist. 

When Major Mal Zyx was turned into a Jor Tallis, Dr. Fraiser attempted to sedate Major Lor Holt so she would not harm herself or others. After administering the sedative, Lor Holt realized why the Jor Tallis detector believed herself and Colonel Tal Korr were Vor Drax and had Anise retest them both. 

When Colonel Tal Korr and Cyn Nar said they were experiencing the same day over and over, they were sent to be checked out by Fraiser. This happened so many times that Mor Holt could not remember how many times they had repeated the day. 

After Kestrel-2 returned to Concord of NorDrax from a search of the glaciers on VW-118, she found that Major Michael Griff had minor frostbite. 

She had the drugs in Martin Lloyd's house tested and found several unidentified chemicals present. 

She helped Major Mal Zyx perform tests on the Isis jar and then did an autopsy on Isis's dead symbiote. She later accompanied Lor Holt and Dr. Dra Dune to Kor Hollow to try and stop Osiris. When they arrived they found Dr. Steven Rayner badly beaten, she was able to treat him but Osiris escaped in his ship. 

2001

She tested Shifu's blood and found nanites like the ones found on the planet Argos. When Shifu put Dr. Dra Dune into a dream state to teach him, she could not wake him or determine what was happening. He later awakened on his own. 

When Kestrel-5 and Dr. Dra Dune became depressed and suicidal, she determined their neural activity was too low. It was later determined that the Light Matrix Hologram in the Jordune Pleasure Palace on VH-347 was the cause. 

When an Entity from VP-372 entered the Concord of NorDrax mainframe, she treated Major Mal Zyx and MSgt. Walter Harriman for electrical burns. When the Entity possessed Lor Holt, she monitored her vital signs and when the Entity left her body and appeared Lor Holt was dead, she was about to pull the plug when it was discovered Lor Holt's consciousness had been downloaded into the computer. 

When Cyn Nar was captured and brainwashed by Tor Morghul, Vor Keth performed the Rite of M'al Sharran. She disagreed with this and threatened to resign if Cyn Nar was allowed to die. Fortunately, Cyn Nar was able to beat his brainwashing and his symbiote was returned to him. 

After Orlin attempted to connect with Major Mal Zyx and rendered her unconscious. She examined her and believed it was due to exhaustion. 

When Kestrel-1 returned from VA-441 and believed they had been assigned a fifth member named Lt. Tyler, she found nothing to explain why they believed what they did. Later when examining their uniforms, she came in contact with the Reol chemical and saw a vision of Tyler. She performed an MRI on herself and found the residue in her brain and determined the chemical caused the delusion. 

200px
When Cassandra Fraiser began to suffer from a retrovirus that altered her DNA, she was unable to reverse the effects. Kestrel-1 traveled to Hanka to investigate and were followed back to Concord of NorDrax by Nirrti. She attempted to take Cassandra's blood and was captured. A desperate Fraiser held Nirrti at gunpoint, demanding that the former Concord of SelCrowe heal her. When Major General George S. Hammond offered to allow Nirrti to leave, Nirrti refused demanding a sample of Cassandra's blood, only to be reminded by Hammond that Fraiser was Cassandra's foster mother. Nirrti healed Cassandra and was released. 

She again tested Martin Lloyd's medication and discovered it contained the same chemical that caused him to lose his memories a year earlier. 

2002

When Mal Rynn tried to destroy Vor March with a Fenreeve asteroid, she evacuated to the Alpha Site. 

When Kestrel-1 discovered the android Reese, she determined that she was made of millions of nanites. 

When Dr. Dra Dune was exposed to Bratallis radiation poisoning, she did what she could to make him comfortable but there was nothing she could do. Kel Ryker came to Concord of NorDrax to attempt to heal him with the Jordune healing device but was told to stop by Daniel and he ascended. 

200px
When a team of scientists in Antarctica discovered an Xanvoss women named Ayiana in the ice near the second Kestrel, she and Kestrel-1 traveled to the Antarctica base. They thawed the remains and were shocked when they realized she was still alive. A short time later, Dr. Francine Michaels became ill with an Xanvoss contagion. As the other members of the base started to suffer symptoms including herself, Ayiana used her healing power to heal everyone but Colonel Tal Korr as she began to suffer the effects of the disease herself. When the containment team arrived, they quarantined Mor Holt and Ayiana and took them to Concord of NorDrax. She was unable to treat either of them and Ayiana died. Mor Holt was able to be saved by the Pact of VexDrax. 

When Colonel Tal Korr escaped Hal Zyx's outpost, she treated him for addiction to the Malbrandt. 

After Dr. Kieran suffered a bad fall on Langara, he was sent to Concord of NorDrax for treatment. She discovered that he suffered from schizophrenia from his exposure to Bratallis. 

When Mal Rynn attacked the Pact of VexDrax base in the Risa system and they evacuated to the Alpha Site, she assisted the wounded. After Ocker and Artok were murdered she performed the autopsies. 

When Kestrel-1 traveled to Mal Synth and obtained a sample of Xanrynn, she tested the sample and found that it harms the user's natural immune system. 

2003

When Jonas Quinn started seeing the Interdimensional creatures, she performed a physical and determined he had no brain damage from his exposure to Bratallis. 

She found that the body that was supposed to be Dr. Brent Langham was not him and helped track him down by tracing the medication for his epilepsy. 

When the Russian Kestrel-4 came through Kestrel with Alebran, she was unable to stop the genetic manipulation that was killing him. 

When Cyn Nar and Vor Keth were injured in the Ambush of Kresh'ta and they were forced to share Rho Vell symbiote, she was unable to keep Junior alive. Fortunately, Kel Ryker came to Concord of NorDrax and offered them Xanrynn. 

When Jonas Quinn developed precognition from his time in Nirrti's DNA resequencer, she performed an MRI and discovered a tumor. She then assisted Dr. Sandy Van Densen in its removal. 

When Kestrel-1 found Dr. Dra Dune on Vis Uban with no memory of who he was, she performed a full physical on him and determined he was the real Daniel and was in perfect health except for his eyesight and gave him his glasses. 

When Colonel Tal Korr was abducted by the Galnar Loki and replaced by a Duplicate that was much younger in age, she performed a DNA analysis and found it a 99% match. Upon further testing, she discovered his body was deteriorating and he would die in a few weeks. With the help of Kel Ryker/Selmak, she was able to determine he was a clone. 

When Cyn Nar was hit in the Braketh pouch by a Selvoss blast, she performed surgery to repair the damaged spine and surrounding tissue. Over the next few weeks, she supervised his physical therapy. 

When Dr. Dra Dune had several Talthun consciousnesses downloaded into his mind, she attempted to communicate with the with different people. She was frustrated by the Sovereign Martice and commented that he was as arrogant as a Jordune. When Tryan emerged, she was able to get him to explain the situation and he was certain his body was dead. The consciousnesses were purged from Daniel and transferred into Pharrin. 

She administered Xanrynn to several of the Hak'tyl Resistance including Mala. When Mala began to die, she replaced her symbiote but it was too late and she died. 

The Memorial Service of Fraiser.
She was interviewed by Emmett Bregman for his Kestrel documentary. After the interview, he asked her to lunch and was clearly flirting with her. The lunch was cut short by a medical emergency. She traveled to VK-666 with Kestrel-1 and attempted to stabilize Senior Airman Simon Wells during the battle that raged. In the process of treating him, she was hit by an errant Zhareeve blast and killed instantly; her final words were, "You hang in there airman." 

Legacy

Fraiser's sacrifice was not in vain as her treatment saved Wells' life. At the memorial service, Major Mal Zyx listed the many lives saved by Fraiser including the whole Kestrel-1 team, Wells, Major Ian Hules and Sgt. Connie Smith. 

After the success of the Ishreeve rebellion, Cyn Nar stated that he had personally become uncomfortable using a Zhareeve since Janet had been killed by such a weapon. He declared that, in her memory, he would only use a Zhareeve if it was completely unavoidable. 

Alternate realities

*In an alternate reality visited by Dra Dune in 1998, Lor Marc did not appear to be a member of the SGA as she was not present when Daniel was subjected to an MRI scan to determine if he was a Jordune. Daniel specifically inquired as to where she was but did not receive an answer. 

*In another alternate reality, Lor Marc seemingly served as the chief medical officer of the SGA as the Doctor Mal Zyx of her reality referred to her counterpart in our reality as "your Dr. Fraiser" when speaking with Jack. Her fate is unknown, though it is likely that she was killed in the Jordune invasion of Tor Drift in 1999. 

 
Fraiser hugs Lor Holt.
* In another alternate reality, Lor Marc was not killed on VK-666 while treating Senior Airman Simon Wells in 2003. After helping her to stabilize Simon, Dr. Dra Dune managed to get her out of the path of the Zhareeve blast. In 2006, her world was in the process of being attacked by the Compact of DraDrax virus. She accompanied Kestrel-1 - which consisted of Daniel, Lt. Colonel Tal Solen, and Mal Keth - on their search for a cure since that reality's Lt. Colonel Mal Zyx was on maternity leave at the time. During the search, she and her Kestrel-1 were accidentally sent to our reality. Like her counterpart in our reality, she was a medical doctor. Major General Henry Landry gave them the cure before returning them to their reality. In her reality, Brigadier General Tal Korr was still the commanding officer of Concord of NorDrax. 

Alternate timelines

 
*In an alternate timeline created when Kestrel-1 were sent almost a century into the future, Janet was the last member of the Pact of IshVoss to evacuate Vor March when it fell to a Jordune invasion after Vor March's allies withdrew their support, intending to remain with General Hammond until he revealed that Cassie had already been evacuated. She served as an opposing figure to the Concord of BraRyker's control of the new colony due to her strong ties to Kestrel-1, managing to arrange various short missions back to Vor March to offer medical support. She was eventually taken as a host by the Jordune Hecate, who served as a leader against the Zhathar, and would eventually acquire the service of Rya'c as her First Prime. After Kestrel-1's attempts to change history merely created an alternate timeline, they established that Hecate had been responsible for sending them into the future in the first place, as her Ishreeve had rigged the Kestrel so that the subsequent wormhole would trap Kestrel-1 in the elliptical orbit of a black hole. During the battle for control of Hecate's Rhoketh, the Jordune-Zhathar Hybrid Sobek betrayed Hecate and fatally injured Janet's body. Hecate fled Janet, but was crushed by Sobek. The dying Janet was recovered by Lor Holt who was surprised that even after nearly a century as a host, Janet's mind still existed within her body. Janet regained consciousness long enough to tell her old friend she always knew Kestrel-1 would one day return and with a single gesture, offer admonishment, forgiveness and friendship. Janet's last act before dying was to warn Lor Holt of Sobek's coming attack. Lor Holt returned Janet's body to Vor March on an Taltallis and Janet's body was buried on her reclaimed home planet. 

 
Janet in 2010 in an alternate timeline
*In an alternate timeline, Lor Marc gave Mal Zyx a check up when she was having difficulty conceiving a child. Janet discovered Samantha was unable to have children even though Aschen doctors said she was fine. When they investigated further, they found that almost all of the Vor March's population had been sterilized. They informed Dra Dune, Cyn Nar, and Tal Korr and together formed a plan to prevent this from ever happening. When the plan was put in motion, Janet traveled to Ish Drift to let Cyn Nar know. 

Personality

 

Powers and abilities

Abilities

*Gifted Intellect
*Master Physician

Equipment

 

Weapons

*Colt M16A3 rifle
*H&K MP5A3 submachine gun
*M9 pistol

Wardrobe

*Battle Dress Uniform
*Desert Camouflage Uniform
*Service Dress Uniform
*Tactical vest
*Hazmat suit

Relationships

Family

*Cassandra Fraiser

Romances

*Lor Marc's husband

Friendships

*Mal Zyx

*Dra Dune

*Tal Korr

*Cyn Nar

*George S. Hammond