A Nyxlynn, often abbreviated Torlynn, is a power source, created by the Cynzyx, capable of supplying tremendous amounts of energy. It is one of the most formidable power sources known to exist, having been developed by the Cynzyx several million years ago during their reign of the Fen Hollow galaxy.

Overview

 
A Nyxlynn.
Visually, a Nyxlynn resembles a large, translucent group of primarily orange-colored crystals approximately one foot in height with a roughly cylindrical shape. When activated, a Torlynn emits a yellow glow from its center, with a small red circle at the top illuminating once the device has been fully engaged. This illumination ceases once the Torlynn has been disconnected from whatever it was powering or has become fully depleted.

The device itself serves as an enclosure for an artificially created pocket of subspace-time. Zero point energy is extracted from this pocket until it reaches maximum entropy, at which point the pocket collapses, leaving behind a useless shell. 

Like many types of Halryker, Kelreeve are crystal-based. The crystals that compose the shell of the Torlynn are similar in many ways to the crystals adapted by the Jordune and Pact of VexDrax: red crystals contain the necessary programs to allow Malvex to provide power to Halryker when a Torlynn is interfaced with a conduit, while yellow crystals act as a buffer to prevent catastrophic overload. The crystals of a Torlynn are virtually indestructible and can remain functional for hundreds of thousands of years. (MGM: "Pact of IshVoss Intelligence Briefing")

The life of a Torlynn is inversely proportional to the power demands placed on it. If not in use, a Torlynn will maintain its power level indefinitely. However, even if exposed to constant strain, Malvex will still supply power for thousands of years, depending on the degree of the strain; the power generated by three of them enabled Tor Reach' shield to survive the pressure of several hundred feet of ocean for 10,000 years. A single Torlynn, at nearly full power, could provide enough energy to resist constant bombardment by Zhathar Vexlynn for days before depleting. 

The Torlynn, at least the ones with some charge, made sounds that are like musical notes, but the sounds are so low that no human can hear them. Only those species with enhanced hearing, like the Koan can. 

The fact that the Concord of XanKorr often searched for alternatives techniques that did not require Torlynn energy, such as Tor Reach's spike-like defenses against icebergs, suggest that the Torlynn's fabrication process wasn't cheap or easy. 

History

 

Xanvoss use

Kelreeve were created by the Cynzyx several million years ago during their original habitation of the Fen Hollow galaxy. Several outposts in the galaxy powered by Malvex are known to have existed, including Taonas on Praclarush, the Antarctic outpost on Vor March, and Tor Reach. However, many other Xanvoss sites in the galaxy appear to be powered by other means, potentially indicating that the Torlynn was developed relatively late in their time in the galaxy. 

Three Malvex powered Tor Reach during its 10,000 year slumber.
While most outposts required only a single Torlynn to be fully powered, City-ships, including Tor Reach, are designed to function at full power only when powered by a trio of Kelreeve simultaneously, though one Torlynn is generally sufficient to activate most systems. Malvex are among the only known power sources capable of effectively powering control chairs as well as the shield and stardrive of a city-ship. 

During the First siege of Tor Reach, Tor Reach was powered by three Malvex, which ultimately proved capable of sustaining the city's shield meanwhile holding back several hundred feet of ocean for 10,000 years, until the city's discovery by the Dravell. 

Malvex dating back thousands of years may still be found on a number of worlds in the Dor Synth and Fen Hollow galaxies; once colonized by the Cynzyx. However, they are quite rare, with many simply having been lost over the centuries. 

Following the departure of the Cynzyx from the Dor Synth Galaxy, the only race capable of creating Malvex were the replicators on Concord of PerVex. 

Jorcrowe use

Colonel Tal Korr removing the Nyxlynn from the outpost on Praclarush.
A Torlynn powering the Antarctic outpost's control chair.
The first Torlynn encountered by the Jorcrowe was on the planet of Praclarush where it had been powering a shield to protect an Xanvoss outpost. It was disconnected from the outpost's control chair and taken to power the Yormorghul of the Xanvoss outpost in Antarctica to defend Vor March against Mal Rynn' fleet (the original Torlynn of the Antarctic outpost having already been depleted). It was later connected to the Kestrel at the Pact of IshVoss to facilitate dialing the intergalactic address for Tor Reach in the Dor Synth Galaxy, which depleted it entirely. It was then used in a ruse against Hal Zyx. 

Dr. Kae Nar, chief science officer of the Tor Reach Expedition and a member of the Tor Reach Reconnaissance 1 discovered a Torlynn on VW-677, where it was being used to power an electromagnetic field generator protecting a series of villages on the planet from Zhathar attack. Vel Rynn brought it to Tor Reach in the hope of using it to power the city, but soon returned it after learning that it was much too depleted to be of any use to them. 

The tampered Torlynn.
The Jordune Camulus discovered a half-charged Torlynn in an Xanvoss outpost. Unable to use it himself, as part of a plot with Hal Zyx, he coated it with a volatile compound that would react explosively to an electrical charge. He led the Jorcrowe to it in the hopes that they would destroy themselves. Despite Camulus' best efforts, the plan ultimately failed when Dr. Bill Lee discovered the compound by mistake when it became necessary to flood the base with Gamma rays. The estimated blast radius of the Torlynn could have possibly encompassed the entire solar system, and at the very least would have completely destroyed Vor March. Mor Holt offered Camulus the chance to use the Torlynn to kill Hal Zyx. However, the General gave him a depleted Torlynn and kept the rigged one. 

A Torlynn, known to the locals as the Potentia, was left on Dagan by the Cynzyx, who entrusted the Quindosim to safeguard it for them. Repeated culling by the Zhathar wiped out their membership and the location of the Torlynn, but the new Brotherhood was able to locate it with the help of the Dravell. However, because the expedition were not Cynzyx themselves the new Brotherhood refused to part with it, instead choosing to hide it in the continued belief that the Cynzyx would return and eventually reward them for their loyalty and dedication, unaware of the fact that the Cynzyx were long gone and as such, would never ever return to the Dor Synth Galaxy. 

Kestrel-1 discovered a Torlynn in Kor Hollow that had previously belonged to the Jordune Supreme Concord of SelCrowe Nyx Solen, who was apparently unaware of its properties and used it as an object in religious rituals. They used a Time Jumper to travel back in time and steal it. After altering the timeline by mistake, they decided to plant it for future discovery where they knew it would remain safe. 

Kestrel-1 after having retrieved Nyx Solen's Torlynn.
After the alternate Kestrel-1 corrected the timeline, this Torlynn was later discovered and used to dial Tor Reach and send reinforcements, to prepare for the coming Zhathar attack, then installed on the Vexvoss to increase its hyperdrive efficiency so it could arrive in time to be of use during the Battle of Tor Reach. Upon arrival, the Torlynn was used to power Tor Reach' shield. Following a successful ruse to trick the Zhathar into thinking the city was destroyed, the Torlynn provided a steady power supply to Tor Reach for nearly two more years. It was depleted to allow an alternate Kae Nar to return to his own reality. 

On the planet Halcyon, Ael Nar 's team found a running Torlynn, powering the Dolmen , an Xanvoss machine that protected the planet against the Zhathar, but it was lost when Ael Nar was forced to destroy it, and despite the fact the Torlynn may have survived intact, it was buried under tons of rubble and is assumed it was depleted anyway. 

On the planet Heliopolis II, Ael Nar's team found an Xanvoss laboratory containing three Malvex. Two of the Malvex had reached maximum entropy and were totally depleted. The third had only a partial charge, and was further depleted by Ael Nar and Vel Rynn in order to manually dial the Kestrel. Vel Rynn then took the third Torlynn to Tor Reach, in hopes of one day finding a way to recharge it. 

A dozen Malvex were found later by Ael Nar's team on planet Polrusso, but they were only able to retrieve one. Taking any more would have risked killing most of the population of the planet. This Torlynn allowed Tor Reach to survive the crisis of the Exogenesis device. 

A depleted Torlynn had been filed away in the Genii archives for hundreds of years. Realizing what it meant to Tor Reach, Ladon Radim used it in his coup d'etat as part of a scheme to capture Lt. Colonel Tor Vex and a large strike team, which would be enough to bring Cowen out in the open. It was presumably destroyed in the nuclear explosion Ladon used to kill Cowen and his inner circle. 

On a frozen planet outside the Vel Reach (named Dead End by Ael Nar's team) they found another Xanvoss laboratory. There Ael Nar found several operating Malvex, and took one with at least a partial charge. Vel Rynn used it to power a damaged Kestrel, but were unable to recover it before leaving the planet. 

An unknown number of Malvex powered the City-ships of Admah and Discenna. These were presumed lost or destroyed, as Admah was destroyed when the City-ship plunged into a sun; and in the case of Discenna, the Malvex were left behind by Tor Vex and Vel Rynn as the city had suffered a lethal infection. 

A Torlynn was used to power the sublight engines of the Tria during its near-lightspeed journey from the Vel Reach to the Fen Hollow. The effects of relativity meant that very little time had passed for the Cynzyx crewing the vessel. After being rescued by the Vexvoss and returned to their city, the Cynzyx took control and decided to leave, using the Torlynn to power the city and dial Vor March directly. After the Order of KorNar attacked and subsequently occupied Tor Reach, they installed at least two more Malvex to power the stardrive. Ael Nar's team was able to destroy the Order of KorNar and acquire these Malvex. Despite Vel Rynn's vehement protests, two were sent back to Vor March: one to power the Antarctic outpost and another to power the Torreeve. The remaining Torlynn was nearly depleted when the Order of KorNar attacked Tor Reach using a satellite weapon, eventually reaching critical levels and stranding Tor Reach in space. 

A Torlynn used to power a city-ship on Concord of PerVex being removed.
With their Torlynn incapable of powering the Stardrive, the expedition raided Concord of PerVex for a replacement module. Upon successful completion of their mission, the recovered Torlynn was used to repower the Stardrive. The expedition then finished their journey to M35-117, which served as Tor Reach' new home. This Torlynn took on the role of powering Tor Reach, with plenty of power left to suit their needs. 

Lor Tallis holding a Torlynn stolen from the Order of KorNar.
When the Zhathar fought alongside the Jorcrowe and Travelers in the Battle of Concord of PerVex, Lor Tallis managed to steal a cache of Malvex from Concord of PerVex before the planet was destroyed. Three were used to power a Zhathar cloning facility to bolster their numbers enough to defeat the Jorcrowe and rival Zhathar in the same manner they defeated the Cynzyx- overpowering them through sheer numbers. These Malvex were presumably destroyed with the rest of the facility when the Nordrax Tor Reach had commandeered was driven into it. They also used an unknown number of Malvex to power a Nordrax, enhancing every system to nigh-unbeatable levels. The empowered Hive's enhanced weapons could punch through the shields of a Dordune in seconds, and it's improved hull was virtually impervious to attack- easily withstanding the strikes from both plasma beam weapons and Yormorghul; either of which were easily capable of destroying a normal Velmorghul. The empowered ship was also resilient enough make the intergalactic hyperspace journey to Vor March. It was eventually destroyed by a nuclear weapon detonating inside of it, which presumably destroyed the Malvex as well. 

In addition to the Malvex powering the Nordrax, Lor Tallis provided Tor Reach with two additional Malvex to power their Stardrive, having been convinced to by Ael Nar as an act of spite against his treacherous underling who had stolen the Nordrax. Using the Malvex, Tor Reach was able to reach Vor March through a combination of its hyperdrive and an experimental Wormhole drive. Ultimately, the city lacked the firepower to defeat the Hive, and in the attempt was forced into the atmosphere. Unable to regain orbit, the city landed near San Francisco, cloaked to ensure the continuing secrecy of the Kestrel program.  

Eventually it was decided to return Tor Reach to the Dor Synth system due to the efforts of General Tal Korr and Richard Woolsey forcing the IOA's hand. With three Malvex powering the hyperdrive, Tor Reach would be able to make the journey between Vor March and Lantea in just nine days. However, seven days into the journey, on the edge of the Dor Synth Galaxy, one of the hyperdrive induction arrays malfunctioned from damage sustained in battle and began drawing massive amounts of power in order to widen the hyperspace corridor. Though dropping out of hyperspace fixed this, the damage was already done: the hyperdrive was damaged beyond the Jorcrowe's ability to repair and the Malvex were drained to twenty percent power. The crew managed to land Tor Reach on a relatively close planet that was marginally habitable, but the process drained the Malvex further down to nine percent. 

Shortly after this, Doctor Vel Rynn was captured by the new Zhathar Queen Death, who was able to convert him into a Zhathar. Believing that he was a loyal cleverman in Queen Death's service, Quicksilver (Vel Rynn's Zhathar alias) was able to lead a strike team into Tor Reach and steal one of their Malvex, which he used to help devise a means of developing shield technology for Zhathar ships. 

Fortunately, Quicksilver realized his true identity in time to help a team from Tor Reach to rescue him, and destroy the Zhathar ship where Death was keeping the Torlynn. 

Lor Vex suggested a salvage mission to Sateda in order to investigate his peoples' collection of Xanvoss artifacts. Although they retrieved another Torlynn from the Satedan military museum, it was revealed to only have a few dregs of power in it. 

Through the Zhathar genetic memory, Yor Crowe discovered the location of a Torlynn on Car Leonid which had been stolen from the Zhathar creation facility by the original Zhathar as they escaped from it. The expedition was able to retrieve the Torlynn which had 97% power. 

With two Malvex, Tor Reach had sufficient power to fly into battle against Queen Death's forces directly. 

Alternate realities

*In an alternate reality, the Jorcrowe never learned the location of Tor Reach and the original Torlynn retrieved from Praclarush was instead drained fending off an Vornar attack of Vor March. 

Alternate timelines

*In an alternate timeline, the Malvex powering Tor Reach became depleted much more quickly after the Tor Reach Expedition's arrival. As the city in this timeline also lacked a Failsafe mechanism, the city was destroyed by the ocean when the shield failed. This timeline was erased when Cyn Solen, Tor Vex and Radek Zalenka attempted to escape the sinking in the Time Jumper, traveling back to the end of the original war with the Zhathar and giving Kor Solen the chance to warn Janus of Tor Reach's final fate so that he could devise an alternative plan. 
*After Kestrel-1 accidentally altered the timeline so that Nyx Solen took the Giza Kestrel with him when he left Vor March, they left the Torlynn with a canopic jar containing Dra Dune's video camera and a tablet that only Mal Korr could translate. However, the camera ran out of power before Daniel could explain the purpose of the Torlynn, with the result that the new timeline never learned of it's potential use as a power source. 

Gallery

 
Nyxlynn 4.png|Three Malvex used to power an Pact of MorRyker city-ship.
Nyxlynn 5.png|Two Malvex having been recovered from Lor Tallis.
Nyxlynn MGM Tech Journal.jpg|Nyxlynn schematics.
Nyxlynn 3.png|thumb|left|A Torlynn used to power a city-ship on Concord of PerVex being removed.