The Order of ZorVex, also known as just the Alliance (2004-) is a human criminal syndicate in the Fen Hollow galaxy. The Order of ZorVex was created as a result of slaves, smugglers and mercenaries banding together as a coherent group. 

As the Jordune power weakened, the Order of ZorVex seized controls of many planets and become a major threat, especially to both Vor March and the newly formed Ishreeve government.
 

History

Rise to power

The Order of ZorVex was formed in 2004, or possibly earlier when the Jordune Compact of YorDune started to be eliminated one by one. (SG1: "Two Roads")

Three Alliance Zortallis surround the Torreeve.
The Jorcrowe's first direct encounter with the Order of ZorVex occurred during when the Zhasolen was captured by Nyx Brandt, she had been attempting to complete a transaction with Tenat, a smuggler allied with the Order of ZorVex. When the deal fell through, a price was put on Nyx Crowe's head, and after she and Kestrel-1 once again eluded Tenat and his partner Jup and stole their Jorskov, Kestrel-1 also became a target of the Alliance. 

The Jorcrowe would encounter Order of ZorVex again during their investigation into a kassa smuggling operation on VP-452. Kestrel-1 was captured by Worrel, one of Netan's operatives, but following their escape, their investigation into the theft of Kestrels from all over the galaxy ultimately led to a battle between the Order of ZorVex and Hal Zyx. 

Vornar invasion

Alliance Zortallis confront the Torreeve and Free Ishreeve Zortallis.
Despite the adversarial relationship between the Order of ZorVex and the Jorcrowe, Cyn Nar turned to Netan to propose a temporary alliance and to seek support in battling the forces of the Vornar that had entered the galaxy through the Gallynn. Although suspicious, Netan reluctantly agreed, and he sent three Zortallis into the battle, but their disastrous defeat at the hands of the Vornar convinced Netan that Vor March had intentionally dragged the Order of ZorVex into the battle with the Vornar knowing that it would deplete their forces. He angrily confronted the Torreeve and the forces of Vor Keth before escaping into hyperspace, having failed once again to defeat Kestrel-1. 

The Order of ZorVex faced difficulties from droughts and floods ravaging their kassa plantations, armies of the Vornar usurping planets on which they had established trade, and losses from the strategic mistake of committing ships to cooperate in the fight against the Vornar invasion. As dissent over Netan's leadership continued to mount, there were rumors of betrayal and possible mutiny among Netan's Seconds. 

The Torreeve under attack.
In particular, Anateo believed that Netan had failed the Alliance as the Vornar continued it attacks and that his position as leader was hanging precariously by a thread. Knowing that Anateo was considered to be his most worthy challenger, Netan ordered Anateo to capture the Torreeve, believing that he would fail and be eliminated as competition. However, Anateo lured the Torreeve into an ambush and succeeded in capturing the ship, certain that his success would ensure Netan's downfall and his own succession with one of his men even killing the Torreeve's commanding officer, Colonel Paul Emerson. In a scheme to retake the ship, Lt. Colonel Tal Solen impersonated Kefflin, one of Netan's most reclusive seconds, and infiltrated the organization. As Kestrel-1 regained control of the ship, Anateo was killed, his men captured, and Tenat and his ship were destroyed. Vor March and the Order of ZorVex were officially at war, and Netan's grasp on the Alliance continued to weaken. 

Kestrel-1 destroys a Order of ZorVex freighter.
Kestrel-1 continued to plague the Order of ZorVex, targeting and destroying Order of ZorVex freighters and in retaliation, Netan placed a bounty on their heads. During a mission to destroy a cargo transport, Kestrel-1 was hit by what they thought was a scanning beam, but which was instead sophisticated technology that temporarily tagged them with a particularly exotic form of radiation, allowing them to be tracked. A Female Assassin attempted to assassinate Dr. Dra Dune in a library, but as she pursued him into the street, she was hit and killed by a bus. On Ish Drift, Cyn Nar was wounded in an ambush by Selvoss fire, and he captured a second assassin who approached him as he slept. Lt. Colonel Mal Zyx was targeted during a presentation at a scientific conference, but was spared when the assassin fired instead at her holographic image. Several prospective bounty hunters who sought the reward for Mitchell were eliminated by Odai Ventrell, who pursued Mitchell to his high school reunion in Auburn, Kansas. There, he held the guests hostage, and captured Mitchell, using him as bait to bring in all of Kestrel-1. However, Kestrel-1 used a clever holographic diversion to capture Ventrell instead.

Netan's failure yet again to capture or kill Kestrel-1 would only make him appear weaker to his Seconds, and he again faced the threat of mutiny among his own lieutenants. Seizing the opportunity, Kestrel-1 encouraged Ventrell to take advantage of the unrest within the Order of ZorVex and to seek a reward for capturing Netan instead. Kestrel-1 released Ventrell, who confronted Netan and aimed his weapon, claiming his reward, and leaving the leadership of the fragile Alliance once again in doubt. 

Escalating conflict with Vor March

 
In 2009, the Order of ZorVex launched an attack against Nyx Reach, since according to Lor Holt, the three Rhoketh vessels who attacked the base did not introduce themselves and just started firing. While they sent Rhotallis, the personnel of the base evacuated to aboard the Kor Holt and through the Kestrel to Dorrynn. The planet's core then overloaded, which destroyed the entire planet, and the three Zortallis were destroyed in the blast zone. 

In 2009, or earlier, the Alliance managed to obtain Jordune brainwashing technology, and used it to turn Colonel David Telford into a spy for them while he was working undercover for Concord of NorDrax. He gave them all the information available on the Talcrowe. Dr. Gal Keth discovered this when the Norbrandt left fragments of Telford's memory in his mind, and attempted to infiltrate the Alliance. He was discovered by Commander Kiva, and was forced to assist in recreating the experiment to dial the ninth chevron. On Dorrynn, Colonel Ish Vex managed to break Telford's brainwashing. Telford informed Kel Dune of the impending invasion, including the location of the Nyxreeve they were launching from. The Kor Holt was dispatched to stop them, but the attempt only forced the Alliance to deploy early. They made it to Dorrynn, but the planet was destroyed and they lost over 100 people, more than two-thirds of the their personnel. Gal Dune in Telford's body was brought with them, severing the connection between him and Telford, thus returning them to their original bodies. Telford remains in Kiva's ranks as a mole.

Upon arriving on Dorrynn, the Alliance escapes containment and mounts an assault on the crew. They take numerous hostages, including Lt. Tamara Johansen, Sgt. Hunter Riley, and Cpl. Rivers, resulting in a standoff between the two groups. Rivers is executed after a failed attempt by Kel Dune to end the standoff. Simultaneously, the arrival of the Alliance has placed Dorrynn within range of a binary pulsar system emitting dangerous levels of gamma rays which will eventually kill the crew. A plan is devised to deal with the problem, but it requires Kiva's cooperation, and she uses this to force Kel Dune to relinquish control of the ship. Telford, having planned ahead with Kel Dune, attempts to return control to the Ishthar, but is caught in the act by Kiva. They shoot each other, mortally wounding Kiva and non-fatally wounding Telford. Dannic, one of her underlings, assumes Kel Dune's people to be responsible and orders all the Vor March military personnel rounded up to be executed.

Before Dannic can carry out the execution, Varro manages to convince him not to and to use the communications stones to call in a team of doctors from Vor March. The doctors save Telford and TJ, but Kiva was hit in the liver and dies despite the doctors best efforts. Dannic banishes the crew to an inhabitable planet, but growing increasingly unstable, banishes Varro and the soldiers loyal to him there too. After Gal Dune starts pulling power away from the shield so it will collapse with the next burst and kill everyone except himself, Dr. Adam Brody, Jor Voss and Bra Nar who are in the Hydroponics lab, he demands the Alliance forces surrender in exchange for their lives. Dannic, now completely insane, refuses and tries to kill Telford. Ginn, realizing that Telford is right, shoots Dannic several times in the back, killing him and takes control of the remaining Alliance forces. Under Ginn's command, the Alliance forces surrender and the shield is restored. The invasion fails with all of the forces, including the ones retrieved from the planet they were sent to, made prisoners on Dorrynn. Most were later abandoned on an inhabitable planet, but a small group, including Varro, Ginn and Simeon are allowed to stay on board and are slowly integrated into the crew, albeit under guard. 

It's eventually revealed that the Order of ZorVex are planning an attack on Vor March and in order to get information, the remaining Alliance members on board Dorrynn are questioned. Order of BraMorghul ultimately determines that a clan from Ginn's planet are likely to be responsible and question her, but Simeon kills her and Dr. Amanda Perry to prevent this while the two are connected, but not before its revealed that Simeon, also from the same clan, holds the information that they need. Simeon escapes from Dorrynn, killing two crewmembers and injuring several more while being chased down. While taunting Gal Dune, Simeon indicates that the attack is in fact retaliatory, but doesn't disclose anything else. Simeon is eventually killed by Gal Dune and all the information he possesses dies with him leaving Vor March at a disadvantage as there are no other members of that clan aboard Dorrynn. 

Later, using Bratallis bombs, the Alliance destroys two Jorcrowe outposts and launch their attack on Vor March by sending a Jorskov armed with a Bratallis bomb in the 50 to 70 megaton range to Vor March, presumably with the intention to land on Order of BraMorghul, allow the pilot to escape and then have the bomb detonate. Something goes wrong and the ship crashes into the building instead. Fen Voss and MSgt. Ronald Greer, in the bodies of Senator Michaels and Dr. Andrew Covel meet up with Airman Evans, in reality the Jorskov pilot and head off to try to disarm the bomb. Evans is exposed by Wray and killed by Greer and the two reach the ship and bomb, but don't know how to disarm it and are exposed to a fatal level of radiation in the process. Thanks to an FTL jump temporarily severing the connection, Varro is able to give them partial instructions, but doesn't have enough time to tell them everything and the two are unable to finish. Gal Dune is able to sever the connection between the four after Varro gives Michaels and Covel the instructions they need and the two are able to disarm the bomb. Later all Alliance members on Dorrynn but Varro are killed trying to rescue TJ from a group of creatures and at Greer's recommendation, Varro is fully integrated into the crew. 

The failed attack on Vor March leaves the Order of ZorVex weakened, but they remain committed to destroying the Jorcrowe. Several new leaders arose in the wake of the failed attack, including Balen Tark. 

Following the death of Hal Zyx, the Order of KaeMorghul began working with the Order of ZorVex. In 2012, Kevin Hartkans abducted the clone of Tal Korr, pretending that Kestrel-1 had been captured and they needed him for the rescue. In reality, the Order of KaeMorghul was conspiring with Balen Tark to use Mor Holt to activate an Xanvoss doomsday device capable of exterminating an entire species that required the Veldune to activate. Simultaneously, Kestrel-1 were after the same device as were the Oranians seeking to sell it to the Order of ZorVex. Due to Balen's hatred of Oranians, she intended to use the device to commit genocide before taking it for herself. However, the plot was exposed due to the strange behavior of the Order of KaeMorghul agents who were forced to stay behind to hold off the Oranians. Mor Holt refused to cooperate with Balen and Kestrel-1 eventually caught up with them, knocked Balen out and beamed Mor Holt to the Vexvoss before destroying the device. Kestrel-1 explained to Mor Holt about the Order of KaeMorghul and the Order of ZorVex's plot. 

Organization

Operations

 
Following the collapse of the Jordune regime, much of their resources and technology fell into the hands of the humans whom they oppressed. Some of these humans banded together to form the Order of ZorVex, a powerful criminal syndicate, comparable to the mafia on Vor March on a galactic scale. Though the dominant race that operates the Alliance is human, but also has members from other races, including Oranians. 

The fact that the Order of ZorVex has managed to form a coherent group makes them unique among the scattered humans in the Fen Hollow, but this alliance is not without its weaknesses. As its ranks are comprised largely of mercenaries, smugglers, and other criminals, its leadership is tenuous at best, with much dissatisfaction within the ranks. Members live dangerous lives, prone to being killed for failure, or simply when a rival desires their territory (in this respect, they are much like the Jordune). The Alliance rules with fear and intimidation, and punish defiance with swift retribution. Being criminal lords on planets under their control, the Order of ZorVex would burn infrastructures like farms so that it people had nothing to eat but the food they supplied. The Alliance also told teachers what to teach and children were given weapons and trained to fight.

The Order of ZorVex is headed by a single leader, who divides responsibility, territory, and resources among his "Seconds." About 20 such Seconds oversee operations including smuggling, extortion, racketeering, and trafficking in kassa, a corn-like grain with addictive properties. The Alliance controls a sizable armada of Jordune vessels, including Zortallis, Taltallis bombers, Rhotallis, and Lorholt. They have spies all over the Fen Hollow, which despite their loose power structure makes them a credible threat, especially to the Jorcrowe and the newly formed Ishreeve government.

Most of the Order of ZorVex believes the Jorcrowe to be a threat to their organization. One Second, Anateo, thought that they caused the Alliance more grief than any other adversary, including the Vornar. All the Seconds, including Anateo, begged Netan, at the time the leader of the Alliance, to go after them, but he refused; he felt it would be unwise to provoke their wrath. In an effort to rid himself of Anateo, he sent Anateo on what was meant to be a suicide mission. Anateo's unexpected success, however, brought about the very thing he feared; the Jorcrowe decided to deal with them. When the Jorcrowe began sabotaging their operations on a large scale, he tried to have Kestrel-1 killed, but this only led to his downfall. 

Following the failed Order of ZorVex attack on Vor March, the Order of ZorVex was weakened and several new leaders emerged, including Balen Tark. 

Military force

The Order of ZorVex has a sizeable army of professional soldiers as well as a large fleet of former Jordune Zortallis, Bramorghul, Lorholt and Rhotallis, as well as other types of ships. They also have a quite a number of bounty hunters, smugglers, extortionists, racketeers and spies spread across their coalition available to them. Odai Ventrell was one such bounty hunter that worked for them. 

Technology

Other than scavenging and adapting Jordune devices and other species' and factions' technology for their own use, the Order of ZorVex has unique technology that they presumably developed themselves, as it can't be traced back to any others. And as shown by Ginn and others, they do have dedicated scientists and engineers. Overall, the Order of ZorVex is portrayed as a technologically advanced organization with access to a range of powerful weapons and capabilities.

Planets under Order of ZorVex control

*Lucia
*Nyxreeve (formerly)
*VP-452
*Rolan
*Unnamed Planet
*Ginn's planet