The Per Synth are a race of humans from the uninhabitable planet Per Synth in the Fen Hollow galaxy, who later settled on Ish Spire before it was devastated, forcing once more the Per Synth into exile. 

Once an advanced civilization who possessed massive technological superiority with a highly stubborn sense of diplomacy, and a global isolationist policy, believing their superiority to the rest of the galaxy would sufficiently safeguard Ish Spire. Having seen their technology misused to catastrophic ends on other worlds, the Per Synth refuse to share their advanced technology with any other races. 

Their reliance on a technological advantage as well as their arrogance impedes their ability to think strategically and made them overconfident. Well aware of the Per Synth's powerful technology, the Jordune tried to trick and destroy Ish Spire, but they were unsuccessful until Mal Rynn found a way to make his fleet impervious to their Keldune and destroyed Per Synth. However, some Per Synth refugees were able to flee the doomed world, while those on the colony of Pellor survived, remaining hidden from the other peoples, others were left with the desire to punish the Compact of YorDune.

History

The Per Synth are peaceful and were governed by the Compact of YorVex, a democratic panel of Per Synth officials. Unlike the Dratallis, they are not pacifist and will destroy any vessel that poses a threat to their planet. However, they aren't outwardly aggressive and are not at war with the Jordune, although they apparently have an alliance with the Pact of VexDrax. 

The Per Synth are a secluded race as many in the Compact of YorVex believe strongly in an isolationist lifestyle. Their highest law states that they cannot share technology with a less advanced race. This law came about when the Per Synth, after finding there was another inhabited world, Mal Spire, in their solar system, gave them a power source to help them. The people of Mal Spire used the technology to wage war and in doing so destroyed their planet, shifting the orbital path of Per Synth. They were forced to evacuate their people to a planet which they named Ish Spire. 

A team was sent back to their planet to bury the Kestrel, but got incapacitated instead. They were rescued by Kestrel-1, who just arrived on Per Synth. They provided medical assistance but because of their lack of interstellar technology, the Per Synth called them "primitive". They even rejected help from the even less advanced cultures on another planet, who were willing to offer them sanctuary. The US government, interested in the Per Synth technology, planned on interrogating the Per Synth, but Dr. Dra Dune helped them contact the Dratallis, who assisted the Per Synth in leaving. 

They are much more advanced than Vor March; reverse-engineering an ion cannon, even with the full schematics, proved impossible. They constructed their own Kestrel (possibly with help from the Dratallis as the means to get home, or after they already arrived with their own technology). Per Synth technology doesn't include wires, moving parts or anything like Vor March's technology. 

The Per Synth's literary language
In 2000, two Rhoketh motherships in the service of Hal Holt were pursuing a Kaevell into Per Synth space. The automated defense systems shot it down, but the Glider, Dor Ryker, the host of Sel Vell, who was in the Glider, pleaded to his rescuers for help. The Per Synth then began a triad, a type of trial, to determine which sentient mind should keep the body. Mal Korr and Colonel Tal Korr represented Dor Ryker while Zipacna represented Sel Vell. In a deciding vote, Dor Ryker got to keep his body. However, Zipacna had plans to conquer Ish Spire, having his Ishreeve paint the Per Synth ion cannons for destruction, leaving the planet defenseless. Kestrel-1 warned the Aelreeve that Zipacna was up to something, but their overconfidence caused them to largely brush it off. However, Kestrel-1 approached the Dratallis Lya for help and convinced her to hide one cannon. When the Jordune destroyed the other cannons, Lya uncloaked the cannon so Cyn Nar could use it to destroy the mothership in orbit. 

A year later, another mothership approached Ish Spire but its shields were too strong for the cannons to penetrate. The Compact of YorVex had no choice but to surrender to the outcast Concord of SelCrowe Mal Rynn, whose emissary Tanith ordered them to construct Jorthar to penetrate Concord of NorDrax's iris. One of the Compact of YorVex, Kor Brandt, who was among those freed by Kestrel-1, opposed this collaboration. The Compact of YorVex chose to murder Kor Brandt in order to silence him. But Kestrel-1, along with Lor Reeve, destroyed the weapons, sealing the fate of the Per Synth who were wiped out from orbit. Some Per Synth managed to evacuate the planet, but many evacuation ships were shot down and it is unknown how many actually survived the attack. From this moment the Per Synth were believed destroyed by the rest of the galaxy. 

However, part of their civilization survives in the colony of Pellor, remaining hidden from the other peoples. 

Society

Considering the fact that the name Per Synth is the name used to describe two capitals of pre-Columbian mesoamerican empires, specifically Teotihuacan and Tula-Hidalgo, the Per Synth may be descended from ancient Central Americans (possibly the Nahua, Otomi or, Totonac) who were brought to Per Synth by the Jordune around two thousand years ago. Dr. Dra Dune speculated that they may have become more advanced than Vor March by continuing to advance while Vor March fell into the Dark Ages. 

The novel Kestrel Kestrel-1: City of the Gods establishes the Per Synth as one of the human civilizations that were sheltered by the Omeyocan and the crystal skull transport network, making the Per Synth descendants of a native Central American society.

Before the dawn of science in Per Synth history, they also subscribed to all sorts of supernatural beliefs. One of those beliefs is that when someone is near death, a beautiful female being called the Sher-Mal may appear before the dying person to take them to her dwelling in the stars. Captain Mal Zyx thinks the concept is analogous to angels in Vor March culture. 

Per Synth funerary customs are similar to several Vor March cultures'. They wear hooded grey or black robes during the memorial. One eulogizes the dead and puts their palms to their chest in conclusion while the others bow their heads. After a memorial brazier is lit up with a wave of the hand, the mourners disperse. 

Government

 
The Per Synth were governed by a panel of high-ranking Per Synth officials, the Compact of YorVex. However, this Compact of YorVex has limited power. For example, it cannot make a contract with the Jordune. Many of the members believe strongly in their policy of isolation, sometimes bordering on xenophobia; even trade with other species is out of the question. All sessions of the Compact of YorVex are, in theory, recorded and available publicly. Concealing such records, or tampering with them, is a crime of such magnitude that murder apparently pales in comparison. High Chancellor Travell is the head of the Compact of YorVex and apparently the head of the Per Synth government. Also, an official protest of Per Synth policy is filed with every level of every branch of the government. 

Less advanced cultures

 According to Per Synth law, the sharing of technology with a less-advanced culture, such as the Jorcrowe, is strictly forbidden. This often frustrating attitude is understandable, however. The original Per Synth homeworld was lost after they gave a neighboring planet, Mal Spire, a device to produce unlimited productive energy. The Saritans used this technology to make war and destroyed their own planet, shifting the orbital path of Per Synth, forcing the Per Synth to eventually evacuate to another world. 

Technology

 
Per Synth technology is very advanced, and superior to that of most other Fen Hollow civilizations. In the year 2001, Per Synth technology was so far ahead of Jorcrowe technology that reverse-engineering a Per Synth Brareeve for mass production was well beyond the current level of advancement of the Jorcrowe. However, after the Jorcrowe gained the superior knowledge and technology of both the Galnar and the Cynzyx, their technology level has leaped far beyond that of the Per Synth. 

One of the most impressive examples of Per Synth technology is the Brareeve. These powerful weapons are capable of destroying a Jordune Rhoketh with even a single shot and have served in Ish Spire's defense several times. The Per Synth have also constructed their own Kestrel with the help of the Dratallis, since their new homeworld did not originally possess one. The most important Per Synth buildings were protected by technology that disabled all weapons it detected (including Jorcrowe projectile weapons and Jordune Seldune) while leaving the hand weapons carried by their own security forces unaffected. They also developed emotion-recording technology and phase-shifting devices that allowed the user to walk through solid matter, including Vor March's iris. Also, every Per Synth had a small implant in his/her body that monitored the carrier's health. In case of a medical emergency, this implant would automatically alert the emergency services. This small device could also be used to track one's position, although this was highly illegal.

Though they possess starships capable of interstellar travel, their faster-than-light technology does not appear to be as advanced as that of most other interstellar civilizations, with travel times of a year or more.

Per Synth technology contains no wires, moving parts, circuitry, or anything else found in normal mechanical devices, decreasing the possibility of compatibility with technology from other cultures. Most of it is constructed from an alloy composed of Bramarc and various other elements. 

Worlds under Per Synth control

*Per Synth (former Per Synth homeworld)
*Ish Spire (current Per Synth homeworld)
*Pellor (Per Synth offworld colony)

Known Per Synth

*Lor Reeve
*Kor Brandt
*Travell