Per Synth, designated P3X-7763 by the Jorcrowe, was the homeworld of the Per Synth. When their planet began to go through a great cataclysm, the Per Synth abandoned the planet by ship. Kor Brandt and a team remained behind to bury the Kestrel, but they began to succumb to the toxic gases released by the volcanoes. Kestrel-1 found them like that, and took them back to Vor March. 

History

Settlement

Though it was thought that the Per Synth were brought to Per Synth by use of the Kestrel, and indeed some believed it was by the Cynzyx themselves, this was not in fact the case. The truth was lost to even their own histories, and so even the Per Synth themselves did not know they were originally the Mayans of Vor March. They were transported to Per Synth through the crystal skull network by the Omeyocans, as their territory on Vor March was being invaded by the Jordune-controlled Aztecs. Settling on the planet, the Per Synth soon forgot about their Omeyocan saviors and the crystal skulls themselves. 

The planet was rich in natural resources, and so Per Synth civilization flourished at an unprecedented rate. Discovering that their new planet was very much like Vor March, with large continents that were teeming with life and vast oceans of water which gave them a carefully-balanced ecosystem, the Per Synth soon spread across the planet and it became their new home. On the easternmost continent they discovered the planet's only known, and quite vast, desert just below the equatorial range. Despite this pleasant climate, the planet experienced the occasional bouts of earthquake activity and volcanic blasts. As the Per Synth grew in their technological prowess, they learned to partially control their planets climate in order to help mitigate these problems.

Industrial age

The Kestrel on Per Synth during the planets destruction.
It was these very technological advances, as well as overpopulation, that would eventually prove to be the downfall of the planet. Untempered by forethought or planning, they soon ate up their planet's natural resources and entered into a great industrial age. Because of their technological advancements during this time, the Per Synth became secure in their superiority and arrogance. By the time that they realized their mistakes it was too late to save their planet at their level of technology. Having wiped out several species of animals, as well as polluting their air to the level of toxicity, the Per Synth began to work on clean energy sources. Though they managed to make some progress in this regard during their last centuries on the planet, it would have taken thousands of years to fix the damage they had brought upon themselves.

Because of this, and their growing population, the Per Synth began to develop space travel, planning to one day colonize other planets to save their race. They were pleasantly surprised, however, when they discovered one such planet in their own solar system; Mal Spire. This planet was populated by a less advanced alien society of its own, and so the Per Synth offered their own technology so that they could create clean energy through energy generation and fusion. The Saritans wasted this knowledge and, instead of using it to save their planet from the same fate as Per Synth, used it to wage war. The resulting destruction of Satira caused the orbital alignment of Per Synth to shift, plunging it into further chaos and ruining any chances the Per Synth had of saving it.

The landscape on Per Synth after the disaster.
This shift drastically altered the planet's day and night cycle, leaving a large portion of the planet in eternal darkness, and also caused large fluctuations in the planets magnetic field. Because of these fluctuations, the tidal cycle of the oceans was altered causing heavy damage to the atmosphere itself, and earthquakes became nearly constant all over the planet. Soon, black clouds of ash and smoke filled the sky, plunging the entire planet into eternal darkness. The fallout from these clouds poisoned the water, causing it to become acidic and killing the remaining life on the planet. In order to never forget what sharing their technology could do, the Per Synth named this the time of Rememberance. 

Downfall

Having no way to save their planet, the Per Synth once more reached to the stars, sending their entire population to another planet&mdash;Ish Spire&mdash;which was rich with trinium and had a stable ecosystem. Several members of the population chose to stay behind on the planet in order to bury their Kestrel so that no others would be trapped on the planet after they left. It was at this time that the Jorcrowe visited the planet from Vor March, once again uniting themselves with their brethren. As soon as Kestrel-1 stepped through the Kestrel, they noticed their surroundings and chose to leave immediately. This would have meant doom for the remaining Per Synth if not for Dr. Dra Dune, who noticed the bodies of several Per Synth on the ground.

A volcano on Per Synth.
Kestrel-1 immediately set about scouring the local area for any more survivors, finding Kor Brandt and Lor Reeve among others. Although many of the Per Synth were unconscious, Kor Brandt managed to grab Captain Mal Zyx's arm, demanding that they be left on the planet and not saved as he believed that there was a spaceship coming to get them. Whether or not this was true is unknown, as Samantha chose to ignore the demand, taking the Per Synth back to Vor March so that they may live. 

Having learned of these Per Synth survivors, Colonel Fen Rynn used the Nyxvex on Vor March to send a group of N.I.D. agents through to Per Synth straight away. Although the climate conditions were becoming increasingly worse, the N.I.D. agents managed to scout a small area around the Kestrel. They were not able to salvage any kind of sizable equipment or weaponry, but did manage to recover the body of a single Per Synth, as well as a number of smaller Per Synth devices, which they took back to Vor March. Although these devices turned out to be a phase device, inverted phase communicator, and recall device, the intense heat had fused the crystals inside them which made them unusable. The N.I.D. agents sent the devices to Vex Reach to be studied regardless. 

Concord of NorDrax attempted to dial Per Synth once more only a few days after the Per Synth managed to leave with the Dratallis, but were unable to get a lock. This was due to the fact that the Kestrel had been swept away by the lava, covering it completely.