Tor Vex is a Lieutenant Colonel in the United States Air Force and, since 2004, a member of the Dravell, commanding the expedition's military contingent for much of that time.

He is also the current leader of the Expedition's main flagship team, the Tor Reach Reconnaissance 1 or AR-1 for short.

Biography

 

Background information

In the far, distant past, at least one Xanvoss became an ancestor in Ael Nar's family line, passing down the Vexmarc to him. One of his indirect ancestors was the Xanvoss Ikaros. 

Tor Vex was born to a wealthy family and was the son of Patrick Ael Nar, a utilities mogul. By the time he was fourteen years old, his father had already planned his life for him. However, Ael Nar had other plans and wanted to join the United States Air Force. This heavily strained his relationship with his father and never spoke to him since, leaving his brother, Dave Ael Nar, to take his place. When he was older, he joined the Air Force as he had planned and participated in several top secret missions, particularly in Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan, but also visited every continent, apart from Antarctica. He trained to become a pilot for a large variety of aircraft, such as the Apache helicopter, Blackhawk and Cobra helicopters, as well as a V-22 Osprey and an F-16 Fighting Falcon fighter, indicating that he graduated from Test Pilot School. He was married to Nancy Ael Nar, who worked at Homeland Security in Washington D.C.. However, due to spending much of his marriage on secret missions, this led to a strain in their relationship and they eventually divorced. 

Ael Nar in Afghanistan
On one of his operations, he initiated a black mark by going on an unsanctioned rescue mission to save the lives of three servicemen. Another unsanctioned op was to save the life of his friend, Captain Charlie Holland, whose Apache helicopter had crashed in Afghanistan. The mission, however, was unsuccessful and Holland died of his injuries while Ael Nar was sleeping, something that always haunted him. He was later forced to relive this memory when his team went to find out what happened to Major Leonard's team on VD-129. He sometimes has nightmares about this. According to Major Tyrone Franklin, the court-martial didn't go as far as dishonorably discharging him as it wasn't a direct order he disobeyed. Ael Nar was cleared of Holland's death and as all they had was hearsay on everything else, they couldn't make the other charges stick. 

2004

 
Ael Nar flying Mor Holt to the Antartic Outpost
Ael Nar was assigned to McMurdo Air Force Base in Antarctica and was tasked with flying Brigadier General Tal Korr from McMurdo to the Xanvoss outpost nearby. After Dr. Carson Beckett released a rogue Drone weapon and it targeted his helicopter, he was able to successfully evade it and land the helicopter safely. After entering the base he sat in the Xanskov despite Mor Holt ordering him not to touch anything and it was then discovered that Ael Nar possessed the Vexmarc which gave him an innate ability to control Halryker. This led Dr. Cyn Solen to insist on his addition to the Dravell. Ael Nar was less than enthusiastic about the prospect of traveling through the Kestrel to another galaxy, but agreed after Mor Holt personally intervened. Soon after arriving on Tor Reach and discovering it underwater with the shield failing, Ael Nar was assigned to a team that traveled to Athos in search of a Nyxlynn to power the city. Once through the Kestrel, they came into contact with the Athosians, who were led by Zor Korr. At sunrise, Yor Crowe showed him the caves where her ancestors hid from the Zhathar. Once inside, he found a necklace that she had lost years before. On the way back, three Zhathar Darts came through the Kestrel. Yor Crowe and Colonel Marshall Sumner, and several others were beamed into one of the Darts and taken through the gate. He ordered Lt. Aiden Ford to memorize the address of the planet that the Darts gated to. After returning to Tor Reach with the Athosian refugees, Tor Reach' Failsafe mechanism released and the city surfaced. Eventually, Ael Nar used a Jorlynn to led a team to rescue Sumner and the captured Athosians. He and Ford infiltrated the Nordrax and located the prisoners after planting C-4 throughout the ship. He ordered Ford to stay with the prisoners while he went to find Sumner. He was able to locate Sumner but was forced to shoot him in order to keep him from suffering further from the life-sucking power of the Zhathar. He was then shot with a Zhathar spear gun by a Zhathar Commander and brought before the Zhathar Keeper. He was questioned by the Keeper about how he acquired the Life signs detector but Ford, who followed Ael Nar's boot trail, arrived saved him from being feed on. They then blew the C-4 and escaped back to the Jorlynn but with the unfortunate result of awakening the Zhathar from their hibernation cycle fifty years prematurely. On the way back to the Spacegate, three Darts were blocking the way. He used drones to destroy one of them and lure the others away from the gate so Ford could dial and send his IDC before returning to Tor Reach. 

Ael Nar talking to Kor Solen at the celebration party
With the loss of Colonel Sumner, Ael Nar was left to command the military contingent of Tor Reach. He also took up the command of the Tor Reach Reconnaissance 1 with Ford, Yor Crowe, and Dr. Kae Nar, spearheading the expedition's efforts to explore the Vel Reach. 

Ael Nar and Vel Rynn search for Jinto
Shortly after the arriving in Tor Reach, he and Dr. Kae Nar tested the Personal shield emitter by shooting Vel Rynn and shoving him off a balcony. That night, he told the Athosian children a scary story that was just the movie Friday the 13th and then showed Zor Korr a recording of a football game. Later when Jinto went missing, Ael Nar and Halling searched for him. They discovered the Tor Reach transporter and found Jinto in a lab with the Containment vessel for the Shadow creature. Ael Nar later tried to lure it back inside the vessel but it would not reenter. Ael Nar also learnt of the Transcendence process during a talk between himself, Vel Rynn and Kor Solen. Eventually, they allowed the creature to go through the Kestrel to VD-337. 

Ford trying to kill the Iratus bug with his pistol.
On a mission back to the Zhathar homeworld, the team was attacked by Zhathar warriors. He ordered a retreat but he was attacked by an Iratus bug and was fed upon. The rest of the team got him in the Jorlynn but on the way back to Tor Reach the Jumper got lodged in the Kestrel. After using salt and iodine to try to remove the Iratus bug, Dr. Carson Beckett suggested the use of a Defibrillator to stop his heart. After the bug released its grip, he was then placed in the Event horizon until Dr. Kae Nar freed the Jumper and he was revived on Tor Reach. 

Ael Nar and Vel Rynn ambush the Zhathar.
When his team encountered the Zhathar for the fifth time in nine missions, Dr. Cyn Solen concluded there must be a spy in the city. Kor Solen set up new security protocols that restricted the movement of the Athosians despite his objections. While on a Jorlynn exploration of Lantea with Lt. Aiden Ford, they discovered the mainland. After the Athosians relocated to the mainland, he and his team traveled to an unnamed planet. While deciphering ruins, he sent Zor Korr and Ford to find the inhabitants to help with the translation. While they were away the Zhathar attacked the ruins and he was shot with a Zhathar stunner. Dr. Kae Nar and Sgt. Stackhouse were able to drag him through the Kestrel back to Tor Reach but they were forced to leave Yor Crowe and Ford behind. He became angry when Sgt. Bates accused Yor Crowe of being the spy and was surprised when Vel Rynn found the Zhathar relay device in her possession. It had been activated by Ael Nar's Vexmarc gene when on Athos, and he had returned the lost 'necklace' to Yor Crowe neither aware of what had occurred. He then used the device to lure the Zhathar back to the planet and he and the team were able to capture a Zhathar that he named Steve. 

When his team's Jorlynn crashed on VW-677, he stayed in the village with Zor Korr while Dr. Kae Nar and Lt. Aiden Ford searched for the Electromagnetic field generator the Cynzyx left on the planet. He also attempted to convince Keras to not go ahead with the sacrifice. When Ford and Vel Rynn unplugged the Nyxlynn and a Zhathar relay device activated, he destroyed the device but the villagers became angry for desecrating their shrine. Yor Crowe was able to convince the villagers not to kill Ael Nar for destroying it but Aries forced them to leave the planet. When the Zhathar sent a probe, Ford and Ael Nar attempted to shoot it down but failed. Fortunately, Vel Rynn was able to reactivate the device and the probe shut down. 

On a mission to Hoff, Chancellor Druhin showed his team a drug that they hoped would make them immune to Ael Nar speaking with Chancellor Druhin about the Hoffan drug. Zhathar feeding. He offered Dr. Carson Beckett's assistance in perfecting the drug. When Beckett reached the point where the drug required human testing, he convinced Dr. Cyn Solen to allow them to test it on Steve. After the test of the drug killed Steve, he warned Druhin that the Zhathar would exterminate them when a single Zhathar dies from the drug. Druhin refused and began administering it to the population. When half the people that received the drug fell ill and died, he took his team back to Tor Reach. 

When the Dravell was running low on food, Zor Korr brought he and his team to the Genii homeworld and introduced them to Tyrus and his daughter Sora Tyrus. After meeting with Cowen and coming to an agreement on trading C-4 and medical supplies for food, Yor Crowe and Lt. Aiden Ford stayed for the harvest ceremony while he and Dr. Kae Nar returned to Tor Reach to discuss the trade deal with Dr. Cyn Solen. When he and Vel Rynn returned and found a secret Underground Bunker, they were arrested and Yor Crowe and Ford were brought inside. Cowen revealed that the Genii Confederation used to span many worlds but was forced to hide in the bunker and pose as simple farmers to fool the Zhathar. When Cowen revealed their plan to use the C-4 to complete their nuclear weapons, he offered Vel Rynn's help in speeding up their completion. After a loose alliance was formed between the two, he and his team joined Cowen and Tyrus on a mission to a Zhathar Nordrax. Once on the Hive, he, Vel Rynn and Cowen infiltrated a room with a data core and they download information to the Zhathar data storage device. They returned to the Jorlynn and returned to the Genii homeworld. When they landed, Cowen tried to double-cross them and he drew his weapon but was not forced to fire as Cowen surrendered when two Jumpers decloaked. Upon returning to Tor Reach, Dr. Peter Grodin analyzed the data on the device and discovered there were at least 60 Vexlynn in the Vel Reach. 

After the discovery of VU-224's powerful atmosphere, he traveled to Vor March with Zor Korr to brief Concord of NorDrax on the situation in the Vel Reach. After the briefing, Ael Nar took Yor Crowe shopping and began to notice something was wrong. He instructed the driver assigned to him to take them to the apartment of his dreams. After they arrived and some of his deceased friends began to arrive, he knew something was wrong and shot one of them to see if they were real. Fortunately, this was all an illusion created by the inhabitants of the planet and he never left Dor Synth. 

During a trip to the mainland with Zor Korr, they discovered a storm approaching Tor Reach. He and Lt. Aiden Ford traveled to Manaria to negotiate with Smeadon about evacuating the Dravell there. After Dr. Kae Nar and Dr. Radek Zelenka came up with a plan to use lightning to power Tor Reach' shield and nonessential personnel were evacuated, he uncoupled one of the four Grounding stations and headed for the fourth when a Genii strike force under Acastus Kolya gated to Tor Reach. After Vel Rynn was able to activate the radio and inform him that the Genii were after the C-4, he was able to get to the armory first and hide it. After Vel Rynn was tortured into revealing his plan to save the city, Kolya contacted him and demanded he uncouple the last grounding station or he would kill Dr. Cyn Solen. When he reached the grounding station, he was ambushed by two Genii soldier but was able to kill them with help from his Life signs detector. After contacting Kolya and informing him of the failure of his men, Kolya lied and said he killed Kor Solen. After avoiding an ambush from three Genii soldiers, he disabled the Fenreeve generator that powers Kestrel Operations and infiltrated it. After knocking Ladon Radim unconscious, he activated the Kestrel shield killing fifty-five Genii soldiers when they attempted to send reinforcements through the Kestrel. After retreating from Kestrel Operations, he was contacted by Kolya and he demanded he reactivate the generators or he would kill Vel Rynn and Kor Solen. While reactivating one of the generators, he was captured by two Genii soldiers but was saved by Yor Crowe, Ford and Dr. Carson Beckett who returned from the mainland. They planed to attack Kestrel Operations together and he sent Yor Crowe and Beckett to fly a Jorlynn into the room to create a distraction while he and Ford went in on foot. The Genii eventually decided to retreat, trying to take Kor Solen and Vel Rynn with them so he was forced to attack before the Jumper was in the room. Vel Rynn got away and Ael Nar was able to save Kor Solen by hitting Kolya in the shoulder. Vel Rynn is then able to raise the shield and save the city from the tidal wave. 

When Dr. Brendan Gall located the last remaining Lagrangian Point satellite, he along with a team of Gall, Dr. Kae Nar and Dr. Abrams went on a mission in a Jorlynn to investigate. When they arrived, they detected a distress call from a nearby planet. Once they got clearance from Dr. Cyn Solen, they landed on the planet and headed for the Zhathar supply ship. Once inside the ship, they discovered several Zhathar warriors that had been fed upon. After splitting up to search the ship, Vel Rynn realized that the cocoons could keep Humans alive indefinitely if they had a large enough power source and there could still be survivors. He radioed Gall and Abrams and ordered them to fall back to the Jumper. On the way back, Gall and Abrams are attacked by a Zhathar survivor. It fed on Abrams and took Gall. He and Vel Rynn came on Abrams' body and took his weapons and found two Zhathar grenades on a dead Zhathar warrior. After hearing Gall scream, they were able to locate him but he had been fed upon but was still alive. He ordered Vel Rynn to stay with Gall while he went after the Zhathar that was heading for the Jumper. When he caught up to the Zhathar, it had already made it to the Jumper. After luring the Zhathar into the open, he shot him several times with his FN P90 Personal Defense Weapon but the Zhathar healed itself and grabbed a M9 pistol from the Jumper and shot him in the arm and disabled his P90. After bandaging his arm, he used a flare to lure the Zhathar out of the Jumper and tried to enter it but the Zhathar protected it with a shield. He then used one of the grenades as a mine but the Zhathar survived and he fired on him with his sidearm until he was out of ammo. The Zhathar was about to feed on him when Vel Rynn arrived and fired on him with his sidearm. When Lt. Aiden Ford and Zor Korr arrived in orbit above the planet in a Jumper, he used a energy bar to attract the Light bugs to the Zhathar and ordered them to fire a Drone weapon at the largest life signs reading killing the Zhathar. 

2005

While sparring in the Tor Reach gym with Zor Korr, a team of scientists released an Xanvoss nanovirus. They were told by Dr. Cyn Solen to stay put as she had quarantined the city. When Dr. Peterson breached quarantine, he ordered Sgt. Bates to open the doors on the gym despite Kor Solen's refusal. They put on Hazmat suits and are able to find Peterson. He ran for a transporter and Ael Nar shot him but not before he entered the transporter and transported to the Mess hall. Once he entered the mess hall the cities sensors detected the virus and the city entered a quarantine lockdown. Once they realized they could move through the city because of their hazmat suits, Yor Crowe headed for the mess hall to calm everyone down and he went to Vel Rynn's lab. After the electromagnetic pulse generator was not powerful enough to reach all the effected areas, he was able to overload a Fenreeve generator in the atmosphere, causing an electromagnetic pulse, which deactivated the nanites. 

On a mission to Proculus, his team's Jorlynn was attacked by Zhathar Darts. They were saved by a mysterious force from the planet below. After landing on the surface, they were introduced to Chaya Sar. In order to negotiate on allowing refugees to come to Proculus to be protected from the Zhathar, he brought Chaya back to Tor Reach and gave her a tour before taking her to see Dr. Cyn Solen. Kor Solen offered Chaya's people technology in exchange for allowing the Athosians and Dravell members to evacuate there when the Zhathar come. Chaya wished to see information on the various religions on Vor March before making a decision and he took her on picnic where they kissed. During the next meeting, Dr. Kae Nar, who was suspicious of Chaya's actions, scanned her and discovered she was an ascended Xanvoss. Before she could explain, Zhathar attacked Proculus and she returned through the Kestrel. He followed her and after she used her powers to defeat the Zhathar, he went to the surface and explained that she used her powers to destroy a Zhathar fleet long ago and was punished by the Others and forced to protect Proculus for the rest of time. Before he left, she shared herself with him. 

While searching Tor Reach, he, Lt. Aiden Ford and Zor Korr found a room with a women preserved in a Norrynn. After reviving her it is discovered that she is an alternate Dr. Cyn Solen. She explained that in her timeline he died in the Time Jumper after traveling back in time 10,000 years. 

He and the team went to Dagan to search for a Nyxlynn, after an alternate Dr. Cyn Solen gave them five addresses with a guaranteed Torlynn on them. When they discovered the Quindosim Chamber, he entered the chamber with the rest of the team while Lt. Aiden Ford stayed above ground. Ford was then shot with a tranquilizer dart and knocked out by Commander Acastus Kolya's men. Koyla took Dr. Kae Nar and Allina to help him locate the Torlynn and put Ford in the chamber. He, along with Zor Korr and Ford came up with a plan to ambush Koyla and his men with stun grenades. After Ael Nar retrieved the Torlynn they sprung the trap and overtook the Genii. He let Kolya live, but explained that if they were to cross paths again, he will kill Kolya on sight. The team had acquired a Torlynn, but since Vel Rynn told Allina, who was a member of the new Quindosim that the Dravell weren't the Concord of XanKorr they hoped and took the Torlynn until the Cynzyx came back to reward, despite the fact they all ascended. Vel Rynn tried his best to convince Allina of the impending Zhathar siege, but lost. They returned to Tor Reach and were informed by Dr. Cyn Solen that the Long range sensors had detected three Zhathar Vexlynn. 

With three Zhathar Vexlynn on their way to Tor Reach, he and Zor Korr traveled to a planet in their path to do recon. They met with Orin a friend of Yor Crowe's father and warned them of the approaching Zhathar and told him and his family to meet them in the forest after dark. They headed into orbit and scanned the fleet as it exited hyperspace. They headed back to the Kestrel as Ael Nar felt there wasn't enough time to save anyone but were cut off when the Zhathar dialed in. They headed to the spot she told Orin and waited for him. After seeing the Zhathar hit the planet with a beam, he went to investigate on foot and when he returned Orin and his family as well as Arja and his family arrived and they headed back to Tor Reach. After they arrived Dr. Cyn Solen asked him to record a video message for Colonel Marshall Sumner's family to be sent with the transmission to Vor March. 

When Zor Korr was having trouble sleeping, he asked Dr. Kate Heightmeyer to speak with her but she did not like his involvement in her life. After Charin gave Yor Crowe the gate address of a planet where her ancestors were from, he and his team traveled to the planet and discovered a Zhathar Lab that belonged to the Zhathar Scientist that experimented on Yor Crowe's ancestors. They discovered a Zhathar data storage device and brought it back to Tor Reach. Dr. Cyn Solen was able to translate the Zhathar language and discovered that the Scientist was splicing Zhathar DNA into Humans and Yor Crowe has a small amount of Zhathar DNA in her genetic makeup. Yor Crowe then tried to tap into the Zhathar telepathic network and connected with a Zhathar on the approaching Nordrax. When the Zhathar began to feed on someone, Kor Solen ordered Dr. Carson Beckett to pull her out. She insisted on going back in and was taken over by the Zhathar and Beckett pulled her out. While under Zhathar control, she gave the position of the Alpha Site and it was attacked. She wanted to go back again because she was close to finding out the Zhathar battle plan. Kor Solen agreed and she was taken over again and had to be stunned by Sgt. Bates. When she awoke, she told them that the Zhathar were coming to Tor Reach to get to Vor March. 

With three Zhathar Vexlynn heading to Tor Reach, he was tasked by Dr. Cyn Solen in choosing a new Alpha Site. On a mission to VM-316 he and his team encountered a Dinosaur like creature and had to evacuate. When they returned, Sgt. Bates accused Zor Korr of disclosing information to the Zhathar until he explained that it was not the Zhathar that forced them to evacuate. Yor Crowe followed Bates in the hall and confronted him. When Bates said he felt Yor Crowe should not be allow to roam the city unescorted, she slugged him and he and Lt. Aiden Ford had to separate them. Later when Bates was attacked, Yor Crowe was questioned by him but denied her involvement. This was proven true when Dr. Carson Beckett found Zhathar DNA on Bates' uniform. After the location of the Zhathar was discovered, he led the first team to search for him. After his team was stunned by the Zhathar, Yor Crowe and Ford's team double timed it to his position and stunned the Zhathar before it could feed on Ael Nar. Once the Zhathar was in the Tor Reach brig, Yor Crowe tried to enter his mind to find out what he had done to the city but the Zhathar attacked her mind and caused her great pain. Ael Nar was forced to shoot the Zhathar to stop him. After Dr. Kae Nar was only able to destroy one of the Hives with the Lagrangian Point satellite, Kor Solen ordered an evacuation. As they were leaving, they received an incoming wormhole from Vor March. A team of Marines led by Colonel Dillon Everett came through the Kestrel. He informed Kor Solen that he was taking command and his mission was to defend Tor Reach until the Vexvoss powered by a Nyxlynn arrives in four days. When Everett ordered Ael Nar to contact the Alpha Site and recall all military personnel, Kor Solen asked him to wait until she was briefed on the plan. After the briefing, he trained the new pilots on the Puddle Jumpers and deployed Nuclear warheads in orbit. During the first wave of Zhathar Darts, he manned the Xanvoss Xanskov and used Yormorghul to fight off the Darts. Unfortunately, this depleted the drones and he had the idea of remote controlling the Jumpers and using Genii A-bombs to attack the Hives. While Kor Solen traveled to the Genii homeworld and Vel Rynn worked on remote controlling the Jumpers, he and Ford helped sweep the city for Zhathar intruders. After the Zhathar took out one of the Fenreeve generators, they headed for the closest one to help Yor Crowe's team defend it and were able to defeat the remaining Zhathar. After the Zhathar launched a second wave, he went to the chair but the Mark II Fenreeve generators powering the chair were depleted and remote controlling the Jumper was impossible. He chose to take one of the Jumpers on a suicide mission to destroy one of the Hives in orbit. The mission was successful, and Ael Nar was saved by the timely arrival of the Vexvoss who beamed him out. With one Hive still intact, he convinced Colonel Steven Caldwell to use the Galnar beaming technology to beam a nuke into the Hive. After the last Hive was destroyed and the remaining Darts impacted Tor Reach' shield causing a radio black out, he feared the city had been destroyed and was relieved to hear Kor Solen's voice. He was then beamed down to the city with several Marines to help with the Zhathar in the city. After Vel Rynn discovered 12 more Hives on their way to Tor Reach with the Long range sensors, he had the idea of setting up an ambush with the Vexvoss at the Hives hyperspace pause location. When Kor Solen approved the mission, he joined the Vexvoss. After the ships exited hyperspace, the Vexvoss was able to destroy two Hives before the Zhathar used a Jamming code to block the beaming technology. After taking heavy damage, Caldwell retreated and entered hyperspace. Once back in Tor Reach, the Zhathar began to bombard the shield from orbit. He then came up with an idea to fake a self-destruct and then cloak the city. After Ford escaped from the infirmary, he went to search for him but was unable to stop him from getting to a Jumper and leaving through the Kestrel. Fortunately, the Zhathar fell for the ruse and left the system. 

200px
Not long after the thwarted invasion, Ael Nar returned to Vor March with several other senior members of the Expedition. At this point, The Pentagon's intention was to replace Ael Nar with another, higher-ranking officer with a less spotted record, with Major General Henry Landry indicating that Colonel Steven Caldwell was the preferred candidate. At the insistence of Dr. Cyn Solen, however, Ael Nar was instead promoted to Lt. Colonel and appointed the expedition's permanent military commander. While on Vor March, he visited Lt. Aiden Ford's cousin Lara and assured her that he would do everything in his power to find him. On the trip back to Tor Reach on the Vexvoss, Dr. Monroe was found dead. When Dr. Kae Nar discovered that a Zhathar computer virus was responsible, he worked with Vel Rynn and Hermiod to eradicate the virus. When the virus began broadcasting a distress call, he used an F-302 fighter-interceptor to destroy the communications array. After he destroyed it the virus took control of his 302 and he had to be beamed back to the ship. After a system shutdown was ineffective, he and Vel Rynn unplugged the navigational computers from the 302s and tried another shutdown but the virus returned. He realized the 302 he was beamed out of was following them and took a 302 to destroy it. He chased the virus controlled 302 near the corona of a Star and was able to destroy it. They preformed one last shutdown and eradicated the virus. When they returned to Tor Reach, Zor Korr gave him a report on the whereabouts of Ford. 

When Major Evan Lorne and Dr. Parrish were exploring VX-736, they came across a Zhathar corpse. Lorne sent the body back to Tor Reach and Dr. Carson Beckett discovered the enzyme sack had been removed. He recognized that Lt. Aiden Ford was responsible and took his team and Lorne's team to the planet to search for him. During the search, he was paired up with Zor Korr and they came across Lor Vex who stunned them with his Particle magnum. They awoke tied up in a cave. Dra Vex explained that he was a Runner and that the Zhathar were hunting him. Ael Nar was able to convince him that they were not enemies and that Beckett could remove the Zhathar tracker. Dra Vex allowed Ael Nar to return to Tor Reach and bring Beckett but kept Yor Crowe as a hostage. After returning to the planet, he took up a sniper position while Beckett removed the tracker. After hearing Dr. Kae Nar's gunfire, he headed to his location and confronted Ford. He was unable to convince him to go willingly and shot him in the leg. Ford then ran into the beam of one of the Zhathar Darts that had just come through the Kestrel. After returning to Tor Reach, he sent a MALP to Dra Vex's homeworld of Sateda but the whole planet was destroyed. 

He was on a mission on Thenora to search for any survivors during the Zhathar culling there. However, there was none. On the way back to the Kestrel, Dr. Kae Nar and Lt. Laura Cadman were scooped up by a Zhathar beam. He was able to shoot down the Dorkorr. He brought Dr. Radek Zelenka be contacted to remove Vel Rynn and Cadman but there was only enough power to get one out. He randomly picked one and it turned out being Vel Rynn but unfortunately Cadman's mind was transferred into Vel Rynn. He ordered the remains of the Dart to be brought back to Tor Reach. Back on Tor Reach, he trained Lor Vex in Jorcrowe weapons and fighting techniques and was impressed with his skills. He convinced Dra Vex to stay on Tor Reach and convinced Dr. Cyn Solen to allow him to join his team. 

During Lor Vex's first mission as part of his team, the team landed their Jorlynn on the penal island on the planet Olesia. When the prisoners attacked, Dra Vex was shot in the ankle with an arrow and he ordered a retreat. Fortunately, the Poros came and drove the prisoners back allowing the team to retreat to the Jumper. They were then lead to the city and greeted by the Magistrate. On their way back to the Kestrel, their Jumper was shot down by the prisoners. They are captured and restrained by the leader Torrell. Eldon, the prisoner who designed the explosives and was assigned by Torrell to help Dr. Kae Nar fix the Jumper, offered to free them if they take him with them. On the way to the Jumper, a Dorkorr came through the gate. This forced the prisoners to abandon the Jumper and go into hiding. The team is then able to retake the Jumper and Vel Rynn works on the Seldrax. Unfortunately, the prisoners returned and attacked. He, Yor Crowe and Dra Vex attempted to fight them off but were overrun. Torrell tries to force them to take the prisoners with them at gunpoint but Ael Nar refuses. Suddenly, a Zhathar cruiser approaches and Vel Rynn attempts to dial the gate but the power has cut out. Ael Nar has him divert power to the Yormorghul and fires at the cruiser. Dr. Cyn Solen radios from a cloaked Jumper that the cruiser is damaged but two more are closing in. Ael Nar tells her to dial one of the backup planets to the Alpha Site and the prisoners escape. She then dials Tor Reach and the team along with Eldon escape the planet. 

On a mission to Doranda, the team discovers an Xanvoss outpost. While Zor Korr and Lor Vex embarked on a trading mission to Belkan, he and Dr. Kae Nar worked on the outpost to perfect Project Arcturus. After several failed simulations, Vel Rynn believed he had perfected the containment field and they prepared for a test. During the test, the field began to fail and Vel Rynn sent Dr. Collins to adjust the field manually. The field partially collapsed and Collins was killed form radiation poisoning. After returning to Tor Reach, Dr. Cyn Solen shut down the project. Later, Vel Rynn was able to convince him to talk to Kor Solen about allowing the two of them to return and restart the project. During the first test at half power, the device overloaded and Vel Rynn was unable to shut it down. The device then began releasing energy by discharging the weapon at the wreckage in orbit to prevent a catastrophic overload. Unable to prevent a full overload, they evacuated to the Jorlynn and had to avoid the weapons fire. Luckily, the Vexvoss arrived and provided cover for their escape through the Kestrel before the overload resulted in the destruction of 5/6th of the solar system. Back on Tor Reach, Vel Rynn apologized but he told him it may take time for him to trust him again. 

On a mission to an unnamed planet, he learned that the villagers were being terrorized by what they call the Daimos. Their description of it is very similar to that of a Zhathar. Lor Vex offered his help in killing it but he ordered him to wait until morning and the whole team would go. The next day, Dra Vex successfully tracks a female Zhathar into a cave. The team chases her inside but she hides behind a man named Zaddik. Zaddik explains that her name is Ellia and she does not feed because of a serum he created. He returned to Tor Reach and explained the situation to Dr. Cyn Solen and Dr. Carson Beckett who volunteered to come to the planet to examine the serum and Ellia in the hope of perfecting his retrovirus. Once back in the cave, Yor Crowe helped Ellia use her telepathic abilities to locate the adult Zhathar that was killing the villagers. He, Yor Crowe and Dra Vex left to kill it. When Ellia took Beckett's retrovirus and transformed into a creature closer to that of an Iratus bug, Yor Crowe was knocked unconscious and Ael Nar and Dra Vex were forced to kill her but not before she fed on Ael Nar's arm. Back on Tor Reach, Beckett noticed that Ael Nar's wound had healed much faster than usual and that he was infected by the retrovirus. Ael Nar later noticed that his former wound was slowly transforming him into a bug-like creature. Beckett attempted to slow it down by an inhibitor, but Ael Nar was eventually transformed. Beckett came up with a plan to use Iratus bug embryonic stem cells to replace Ael Nar's mutating cells. The team lead by Major Evan Lorne first went to a planet with Iratus bugs but they were unable to get close enough to get any eggs without the bugs attacking. After Kor Solen informed him of the situation, he escaped from his quarters. Several teams helped track him down and Dra Vex stunned him with his Particle magnum. The team was about to say goodbye to him, until Beckett realized that he had the pheromone to stop the bugs from attacking. He was able to get the eggs and was transformed back to Human again. 

He and his team traveled on the Vexvoss to the Xanvoss ship Aurora. Since there was no life support they were forced to wear space suits when they beamed over. After Dr. Kae Nar got life support functioning, he ordered Lor Vex and Zor Korr to search the ship and count the stasis pods. When Vel Rynn realized that the pods the crew was in was also a Virtual reality pod in addition to a stasis pod, he volunteered to enter one of the empty pods to contact the crew. After entering the virtual reality, he was arrested by one of the crew and taken to the Captain. He tried to explain that they are in stasis but the crew was unaware of their situation and placed him in the brig. He tried to convince First Officer Trebal to let him talk to the Captain again to convince him that Tor Reach had been evacuated 10,000 years ago but she ignored his request. He then exited the pod and reentered in order to get the drop on the guard and escape. He cornered the Captain in his quarters and tried to explain but was shot by a Zormarc stun weapon by Trebal and returned to the brig. After Vel Rynn entered the program and informed him that a Zhathar was also in the program and two Zhathar cruisers were on their way, he realized that the Zhathar had to be First Officer Trebal. The two escaped from the brig and he went to the bridge to talk to the Captain again while Vel Rynn went to disconnect the Zhathar. When he entered the bridge and told the Captain that Trebal was a Zhathar, Vel Rynn was able to disconnect it and this proved the truth to the Captain. After the Captain gave him the self-destruct codes, he exited the pod just in time help Vel Rynn kill the Zhathar. They set the self-destruct and beamed back to Vexvoss before the Aurora blew and destroyed the cruisers. Back on Tor Reach, he, his team, Dr. Cyn Solen and Colonel Steven Caldwell toasted the crew with Champagne. 

He and the team were taken by Lt. Aiden Ford's Coalition, to formulate a plan to destroy a Zhathar Nordrax. Lor Vex, Zor Korr and Dr. Kae Nar were dosed with the Nyxketh while he was kept clean in order to convince Dr. Cyn Solen that the enzyme was safe. After Ford explained the plan to use a Dorkorr to plant C-4 on the Hive, he agreed to help but planned to use the Dart to dial Tor Reach. After Vel Rynn fixed the Dart, Ford changed the plan and made Vel Rynn stay behind to ensure he kept his part of the bargain. He beamed everyone into the Dart and headed through the Kestrel. While approaching the Hive the Dart went on Autopilot and forced Ael Nar to unload his cargo blind. Most of Ford's men were beamed off a ledge. Believing Ael Nar did it on purpose, Ford turned off his radio against Yor Crowe's wishes. When Ael Nar landed the alarms sounded and he was captured as were the others. Once in a cell the group managed to escape by using Dra Vex's knives to hit the door controls but they were quickly captured. The Zhathar separated the team this time and put Ael Nar in a cell with Ford and Neera, a girl they tried to rescue from a cocoon. While in the cell, Ford began to experience withdrawal and was taken by the Zhathar Commander to a cocoon. After Neera attempted to get information from him, he realized she was a spy. He was then taken to see the Zhathar Queen. While being questioned, he fooled the Queen into believing he was a Zhathar worshiper for the Queen of the other Hive and was sent to kill her. Before the Queen could feed on him, Ford entered and shot her with Dra Vex's Particle magnum. While Ford drew the Zhathar off, Ael Nar freed Yor Crowe and Dra Vex and beamed them into a Dart. After firing on the other Hive and forcing them to fight, Ael Nar headed for the Spacegate and traveled to an uninhabited planet to release Dra Vex and Yor Crowe. They then headed back to Tor Reach. 

On a mission to an unnamed planet, his team discovered a doorway. He attempted to cross the threshold and was pulled in. Lor Vex and Zor Korr tried to pull him out but were unsuccessful. After waking up on the other side in great pain, he waited in the cave for several hours trying to make radio contact but was unsuccessful. After several days, he began to run out of supplies and headed out of the cave. Once in the forest, he ran into Avrid who was being chased by a Beast. He fought the Beast but was badly injured and Avrid carried him back to the Cloister where his sister Hedda used her powers to heal his wounds. When he awoke, Teer and Avrid explained that the only way to escape was through ascension. After several months, Teer began to have feelings for him. When the Beast returned, he again attempted to defeat it but was badly injured. After several more months, Teer used her Telepathy to see that his team had come for him and that the Beast was upon them. He raced to their location and tried to fight the beast but the villagers came to help this time and defeated it with their powers before ascending. Dr. Kae Nar then explained that he was trapped in a Time dilation field and was gone for only a few hours. 

When Concord of NorDrax informed the Dravell that The Order of KaeMorghul had planted a bomb in Tor Reach, he assisted in the search. When Dr. Kae Nar and Lt. Laura Cadman discovered that Colonel Steven Caldwell's password was used to remove the failsafes, he and Lor Vex confronted him. The Jordune inside him revealed itself and Dra Vex attacked him and threw him to the ground. Ael Nar then shot him with a Taser forcing the Jordune to lose control and Caldwell told them the code. 

When a Jorlynn containing Dr. Kae Nar and Captain Hugh Griffin crashed into the ocean, he came up with a plan to use winch to lift the Jumper out of the water. When Dr. Radek Zelenka discovered the Jumper was to deep for the cable to reach, he had the idea of turning the Jumpers cloak into a shield. They entered the ocean and he began to dive the Jumper while Zelenka working on converting the cloak. After following a Flagisallus later named Sam to the Jumpers location, they extended the shield around the other Jumper and rescued Vel Rynn. 

On a mission to the Lord Protector's Planet, he was scanned by Otho and taken to the Tower. Once inside, he noticed the resemblance to Tor Reach and was introduced to the Lord Protector. He was invited to a feast where the Lord Protector became ill. Otho explained that it was not the first time and he called Dr. Carson Beckett to exam the Lord Protector. During the night, Mara came to him and ask for his hand in marriage. The next morning Otho explained that his Vexmarc was needed as the royal families gene was losing its potency. Beckett discovered that he was being poisoned little by little over the last several months. There was nothing he could do for him and he died a few hours later. Otho offered him their supply of Yormorghul and Puddle Jumpers in exchange for the Vexmarc therapy. After he delivered the therapy, Otho took it himself and had him and Beckett arrested. Later, Mara released him and told him Otho planned to kill the villagers with the Xanskov. He ordered Dr. Kae Nar to drain the Nyxlynn while he went to stop Otho and was able to stab Otho with his own poison knife. They gave the villagers a GDO in exchange for the Jumpers and Drones. 

2006

After his team discovered two stasis pods in orbit in the Kohal system, they returned them to Tor Reach. When Dr. Cyn Solen approached the pod, she was hit in the head with an energy beam and collapsed. When she awoke the consciousness of the pods inhabitant was transferred into her body. She explained that her name was Phoebus and the imprinting was temporary. Phoebus convinced Ael Nar to allow the consciousness of her husband Thalan to enter him so she could say goodbye. After Thalan was transferred, Phoebus attacked Thalan and chased him through the city. Thalen's consciousness expired first (or pretended to), and Ael Nar was able to stun Phoebus, before she would kill him. When he (or Thalen) asked Zor Korr why she gave him the weapon, she responded that she knew that regardless of if it was Ael Nar or Thalen they would have shot Kor Solen with Ael Nar knowing he was armed only with a stunner. He was taken to the infirmary and apologized for anything he might have said or done. 

When Major Evan Lorne's team was attacked on VP-177, he and his team went to assist but found the building badly burned. They discovered several bodies inside and one contained Lorne's Dog tags. They returned the bodies to Tor Reach and informed Dr. Cyn Solen. Moments later, Ladon Radim contacted Tor Reach and Kor Solen allowed him to come to Tor Reach. He offered them a Nyxlynn for a supply of weapons so he could complete a coup d'etat against Cowen. Kor Solen decided to inform Cowen instead in order to keep the loose alliance that was formed during the siege and he and Dr. Kae Nar traveled to the Genii homeworld. Cowen was grateful for the heads up and they returned to Tor Reach. He then came up with a plan to take the Torlynn from Ladon and assembled a team to attack his building. Once inside they stunned several guards and came upon Ladon. Ladon handed over the Torlynn but admitted that it was depleted and the doors closed and the room filled with gas. He awoke a short time later and Cowen revealed that it was his plan to lure him to the planet and use him to trade Kor Solen for all their Puddle Jumpers. Cowen contacted Kor Solen and gave her one-hour to deliver the Jumpers or one of her people would be killed every 15 minutes starting with Ael Nar. Ladon escorted him to a cell where Lorne and his men were being held. When the hour was up, Kor Solen told Cowen that Ladon's sister Dahlia Radim could be saved but he didn't care and sent Ladon to kill Ael Nar. When Ladon arrived he released them in exchange for his sister and they headed for the Kestrel. After returning to Tor Reach, Ladon detonated a Genii A-bomb on the planet and eliminated Cowen and his personal guard. Ladon returned to the Genii homeworld and assumed leadership of the Genii. 

His team captured a Zhathar, later to be known as Michael Kenmore and tested the Iratus bug retrovirus on him. When he discovered his true nature, he and his team took him to the Alpha Site. After Michael escaped from the Alpha Site with Zor Korr as a hostage, he and Lor Vex chased him to a planet and were able to rescue Yor Crowe but Michael returned to the Zhathar. 

On a mission to Taranis, he had Dr. Kae Nar work on the outposts malfunctioning shield while Chancellor Lycus showed him the hanger which contained an Aurora-class battleship. When the planet began to suffer from tremors, Vel Rynn discovered that the supervolcano that the outpost used as a power source was about to erupt. After Lycus was convinced to evacuate to Tor Reach the Kestrel fell into the lava. He had Zor Korr and Lor Vex escort people to the Vexvoss beam out locations and made Vel Rynn attempt to fix the Xanvoss ship which he named the Orion. When the conditions became worse and the Vexvoss would not return in time, he evacuated all the remaining villagers to the Orion and Vel Rynn was able to fix the shields and hyperdrive and when the eruption occurred the ship was thrown clear of the hanger and the hyperdrive activated and transported the ship into orbit. When they returned to Tor Reach, they discovered a Nordrax was on course for Tor Reach. 

A few weeks later, Michael Kenmore brought a Nordrax to Tor Reach and he was assigned by Dr. Cyn Solen to command the Orion. He waited outside of sensor range as Dr. Kae Nar worked on restoring its systems. When Michael explained that they meant them no harm and they wanted to use Dr. Carson Beckett's retrovirus to spread amongst their rival Zhathar factions, he returned to Tor Reach to discuss the proposal. After a meeting with his team, Kor Solen and Colonel Steven Caldwell then agreed to an alliance. After a test of the retrovirus on a single Zhathar, the Queen wanted to test it on an entire Hive. After the attempt failed and Vel Rynn came up with a plan to use the beaming technology on the Vexvoss to test the retrovirus on the Hive, Kor Solen assigned him to the Vexvoss during the test. When the Vexvoss exited hyperspace, they were attacked by both Hives. Caldwell attempted to beam a Nuclear warhead onto the Hive but the Jamming code prevented it. He then led a squadron of F-302 fighter-interceptors to take out the Hives hyperdrive. After destroying several Zhathar Darts with the 302s Railguns and AIM 120A air-to-air missiles, two Darts were on his tail but were destroyed by Major Pat Meyers. Unable to get a shot at the hyperdrive, he latched onto the Hive before it entered hyperspace for Vor March. While in hyperspace, he considered detaching but decided to wait until the ship left hyperspace. Once out of hyperspace, he attempted to contact Vel Rynn and Lor Vex on the Hive but Michael was in possession of their radio and informed him that he was not aware of the plan to betray them and would soon be killed. Michael advised him to take out the hyperdrive. After hitting the first Hive with a missile, the Hives launched Darts and his 302 was damaged. He was brought on board and Michael tricked the Zhathar into releasing him and they headed for Vel Rynn and Dra Vex. When the Vexvoss and Orion arrived and attacked the Hives, he and Michael met up with Vel Rynn and Dra Vex who had escaped from their cocoons and boarded a Zhathar scout ship. As soon as the scout ship left the Dart bay the Hive opened fire and he contacted the Vexvoss to beam them over. Once on board the Vexvoss, Caldwell targeted the Dart bay which took out the Hives weapons but the Vexvoss took several hits and life support was knocked out. Unable to repair the system they beamed the retrovirus on the Hive and waited for it to take effect. After several hours and almost out of air, he led a team onto the Hive and rounded up the Human-form Zhathar and put them into pods. When the entered the Queen's chamber she attacked Major Evan Lorne, as females are immune to the retrovirus, and he and Dra Vex killed her. After beaming over the rest of the crew, Michael entered hyperspace for Tor Reach with the Vexvoss in tow. After returning to Tor Reach, they removed the Zhathar from stasis and Zor Korr was able to pilot the Hive to VN-352 and transferred the Zhathar to the planet. After they left Beckett and a team there and returned to Tor Reach, a Hive was detected heading towards VN-352. Yor Crowe again piloted the Hive to VN-352 and rescued Beckett. He ordered the activation of the Nuclear warhead left as a failsafe by Michael and the others were able to override it. He then ordered Vel Rynn to fire on the camp. When the second Hive arrived, he and his team escaped on a Jorlynn and were rescued by the Vexvoss. 

When Kestrel-1, the main flagship team of Concord of NorDrax came to Tor Reach to implement a plan by using a Kestrel next to a Dor Synth black hole to dial to the Gallynn in the Fen Hollow, to prevent more Vornar warships from getting through, he allowed Dr. Kae Nar to join them on the mission. Ael Nar also gave Lt. Colonel Tal Solen, the leader of Kestrel-1 advice on how to handle Vel Rynn as well as giving him a lemon just in case. 

When Lucius Lavin came to Tor Reach and the rest of the expedition came under the influence of Lucius' herb, he remained unaffected due to the common cold he was suffering from. When he returned to Lucius' planet to investigate and his people were becoming ill, he tricked his wives into giving him a sample of the herb. When he returned Dr. Kae Nar informed him that Dr. Carson Beckett, Zor Korr and Lor Vex went on a mission to VQ-491 to retrieve more herb for Lucius despite his order to shut down all gate activity. In order to cure Beckett, he kidnapped him and took him to the mainland in a Jorlynn to allow him to detox. When Beckett was cured, he allowed Dra Vex, Yor Crowe and Vel Rynn to take him back to Tor Reach and Beckett pretended to still be under the effect of the herb. When Beckett developed a cure and gave it to Lucius under the guise of giving him the Vexmarc therapy. When Lucius tried to fly a Jumper to test the gene, Beckett released him from the brig and boarded the Jumper. He flew the Jumper to the mainland to allow Beckett time to cure the rest of the expedition. 

left
On a mission to an unnamed planet, he and his team were attacked by the villagers. They headed back to the Kestrel but everyone but Dr. Kae Nar were shot with tranquilizer darts. Fortunately, Vel Rynn was able to return to Tor Reach after being shot in the glute by an arrow. He and the team woke up in a cage and Lor Vex remembered having come to his planet as a Runner. Having stayed on this planet for too long caused the Zhathar to attack it. The leader of the village, Keturah, was led to believe that the Zhathar would no longer cull them in return for Dra Vex. Dra Vex grabbed a knife and threatened to kill himself if they didn't release his friends. Ketutah complied and released him and Zor Korr. They returned to Tor Reach and were greeted by Major Elliot Rutherford, who was preparing to mount a rescue mission. They grabbed weapons and headed back to the planet but it had already been culled. They returned to Tor Reach and Vel Rynn was able to adjust the Long range sensors to find the location of the Zhathar tracker on Dra Vex's homeworld Sateda. They traveled to Sateda on the Vexvoss and found Dra Vex in an abandoned hospital. Dra Vex refused to leave without killing the Zhathar Leader. He and Yor Crowe, with the help of Vel Rynn and Dr. Carson Beckett, helped him fight off more of the Zhathar hunting party, with Dra Vex leading the charge. Eventually, the entire Zhathar hunting party composed of at least twenty-five individuals was wiped out. Dra Vex's wish was granted when the Zhathar Leader came down to the planet's surface to fight Dra Vex one-on-one. Dra Vex was almost defeated until the timely intervention of Beckett and a Drone weapon. (Beckett had enough of seeing Dra Vex go through that and killed the Zhathar saying "if he doesn't like it he can shoot me".) Beckett killed the Zhathar, saving a grateful Dra Vex and they returned to Tor Reach. 

When Dr. Kae Nar found a reference to an Xanvoss experiment on the planet Concord of PerVex, his team and Dr. Cyn Solen traveled to the planet to make first contact with the Order of KorNar. They were greeted by Niam and brought before the Pact of MorRyker Council. After an unproductive meeting with the council, Kor Solen met with their leader Oberoth in private about assisting in the fight the Zhathar and trading for any Kelreeve they might by able to spare but he refused. Kor Solen then decided to return to Tor Reach but they were stopped and placed in the brig. They were then mind probed and the Order of KorNar discovered that Tor Reach was not destroyed as they believed. The Order of KorNar took their City-ship into hyperspace and Niam informed them that they were on their way to Tor Reach to destroy it. He explained that the Cynzyx created Nanites to fight the Zhathar and the nanites replicated and assembled themselves into complex machines and eventually imitating the Cynzyx. When the Cynzyx lost control, they sent several warships to destroy them but several nanites survived and were able to replicate. Niam then offered to try to convince Oberoth to spare Tor Reach if Vel Rynn would remove the aggressive nature from their Base code. Vel Rynn was able to reprogram Niam and freeze the rest of the Order of KorNar. Kor Solen decided that because Niam could not guarantee Tor Reach' safety that they must destroy the City-ship. Vel Rynn was able to overload the Malvex and they escaped on a Jorlynn before the city exploded. On the way back to Tor Reach, Niam was reset by the other Order of KorNar and attacked Kor Solen. He and Lor Vex forced him into the rear section and jettisoned him into space. 

After Dr. Cyn Solen was infected by Niam's Nanites, he broke quarantine to convince her to fight against the nanites and she was able to defeat them. 

After being asked to a planet for a meeting by the Genii, he and his team were attacked. They retreated to the Kestrel but he was shot in the back with a harpoon and captured by Commander Acastus Kolya. He was taken to another planet and imprisoned in a cell. He was then brought to a room and placed in front of a video camera that was communicating with Tor Reach. Kolya demanded Ladon Radim be turned over to him in exchange for Ael Nar's freedom, since it was Kolya who actually planned a coup against Cowen. After Dr. Cyn Solen refused, Kolya allowed a captured Zhathar to feed a little off his life. He was returned to his cell and began to talk to the prisoner in the next cell who turned out to be the Zhathar. He attempted to convince the Zhathar to work with him to escape but the Zhathar refused. After two more feedings, the Zhathar finally agreed to help and the two jumped the guards arriving to take them to Kolya. They were able to fight their way to the surface and escape into the forest. Unsure of the direction of the Kestrel, they waited in the forest for the rest of Ael Nar's team to arrive. The next morning, Kolya's men discovered them and the Zhathar fed on Ael Nar to gain strength. After killing the Genii, the Zhathar returned all the years he took from him through the Gift of Life. Ael Nar decided to drop him off on another planet and spared his life, but Kolya managed to escape again. 

When Rod came to Tor Reach from an alternate reality, he played Golf with him but found him creepy. He also attempted to help Dr. Kae Nar deal with the arrival of his duplicate and his sister Jeanie Miller. 

When Major Leonard's team went missing on VD-129, he and his team were sent in to search for them. After finding the bodies of several of the team as well as several Genii, they found a Zhathar device. They headed back to the Kestrel but Leonard used C-4 to blow up the Seldrax and then shot at them from the tree line. With the Lorthar destroyed they headed back to the Zhathar device so Dr. Kae Nar could shut it down. Once there the device began to effect everyone else but Zor Korr because of her Zhathar DNA. When Lor Vex began to hallucinate, he and Yor Crowe chased him through the forest and Yor Crowe was shot in the leg by Leonard. Ael Nar was able to find Leonard's camp and patch her wound but he to began to hallucinate. He had flashbacks to an unsanctioned mission to save the life of his friend, Captain Charlie Holland, whose Apache helicopter had crashed in Afghanistan. He came upon Leonard but was unable to stop him from committing suicide with a Fragmentation grenade. He shot at Dra Vex believing him to be a Taliban soldier. After returning to the cave and shooting Vel Rynn, Yor Crowe was able to convince him to take her inside the cave and she deactivated the Zhathar device. 

When Dr. Kae Nar and Lt. Colonel Mal Zyx figured out a way to go back and forth to Vor March and Tor Reach without the use of a Nyxlynn or waiting three weeks while sitting in the Vexvoss by building the Vel Rynn/Lor Holt Intergalactic Gate Bridge, he tested the bridge in a Jorlynn. After making the trip to Vor March and heading back to the incomplete Midway space station, he was stopped from returning to Tor Reach by Vel Rynn on the Vexvoss as the sensors detected an Xanvoss Aurora-class battleship traveling at .999 the speed of light. After getting close enough to be noticed by the ship, Captain Helia the Tria contacted them and asked for assistance. Colonel Steven Caldwell agreed to help and took the crew to Tor Reach. After arriving in Tor Reach Captain Helia used the Zormarc lockout device to retake control of the city. The entire expedition was requested to leave and returned to Vor March. He was assigned to Concord of NorDrax and led Kestrel-4. After learning that the Order of KorNar had taken control of Tor Reach and that Major General Henry Landry planned to destroy the city, he, Dr. Cyn Solen, Vel Rynn and Dr. Carson Beckett decided to attempt to rescue Major General Tal Korr and Richard Woolsey and retake the city. After stealing the Jumper and escaping the Pact of IshVoss, they used the bridge to travel to New Athos to request the help of Zor Korr and Lor Vex in retaking the city. After returning through the Kestrel and dropping an explosive device in Kestrel Operations, they went into orbit and retrieved Niam in order to use him to freeze the Order of KorNar. Upon returning to the city, the Order of KorNar fired Yormorghul at their Jumper. Ael Nar did his best to evade them but had to submerge the Jumper and enter the underwater Jumper bay. Once inside, Vel Rynn discovered he could not drain the water and the outer door was jammed. Fortunately, Mor Holt was able to manually drain the water but he and Woolsey were captured by the Order of KorNar. After Niam was reactivated and destroyed by Vel Rynn, the team paired off and headed for the shield emitters. He teamed up with Vel Rynn and planted C-4 and an Anti-Yorskov gun crystal in the emitters as well as telling a false plan to Mor Holt and Woolsey. After completing the task they were captured. Once in the brig, the Order of KorNar activated the shield and were destroyed by the Anti-Yorskov field. After that was accomplished, he joined the rest of the expedition returning to Tor Reach. 

2007

He picked up Lor Vex and Dr. Radek Zelenka after their camping trip to the mainland so Dra Vex could hunt for game while Zelenka preformed ground penetrating radar tests to test the dielectric permittivity of the region's subsurface. On the way back, the Puddle Jumpers navigation malfunctioned by Zelenka was able to fix it. When Dr. Kae Nar discovered that the Flagisallus, presumably the same one who gave away Vel Rynn's position under the ocean, visited Tor Reach. Vel Rynn took a look through the binoculars, and called him Sam, after Lt. Colonel Mal Zyx. When another Flagisallus arrived, he and Vel Rynn decided to take a Jumper for a closer look. When they got too close the echolocation began to effect them and he returned to Tor Reach but not before their eardrums were damaged. However, at the same time people started to hallucinate several worried Xanvoss scientists. While recovering in the infirmary, Vel Rynn discovered a Bio lab in the database and investigated. They found that a device was being used by the Flagisallus to create the images in order to warn them of an impending Coronal mass ejection. He came up with a plan to use a Nyxlynn to strengthen the Vexvoss' shield to deflect the ejection, which was successful. 

When the team encountered Lucius Lavin again, Lor Vex took up Lucius' offer to hit him and almost broke his hand on his Personal shield emitter. Later, while trying to retake the village from Commander Acastus Kolya, Dra Vex, Zor Korr, Dr. Kae Nar and Dr. Carson Beckett were captured but he was able to escape. After Lucius managed to slip away from Kolya's men and meet up with him, he took Lucius' shield and sent Lucius to round up the villagers. He entered the town and allowed the Genii to shoot him in the shield. With the Genii out of ammo, the villagers surrounded them and he ordered Kolya to surrender but Kolya went for his weapon and Ael Nar was forced to kill him. 

After Dr. Kae Nar was zapped by the Transcendence machine, he was assigned by Dr. Cyn Solen to teach the meditation techniques he learned from the People of the Cloister. After several attempts, Vel Rynn was able to reduce his brain activity to a point where he could Ascend if he wished. 

After discovering a Society research lab in the first year of the expedition and believing it was a computer game, he and Dr. Kae Nar began to compete against one another. A few years later, Major Evan Lorne and his team visited VJ-058 and discovered that the game was real and a group of satellites was relaying information to Tor Reach. He and his team traveled to the planet and was greeted by Baden, the leader of Ael Nar's country, named Hallona. He brought Baden to meet with Nola, the leader of Vel Rynn's country which he named Geldar, in order to negotiate a peace settlement. After having no success, they brought them both to Tor Reach to explain that the differences between them was caused by their accidental interference. While showing Baden the lab, Baden used it to order an attack on a Geldar mine. After returning to the planet, he and Yor Crowe went with Baden to Hallona in order to prevent a full war. After the Vexvoss arrived, Vel Rynn was able to simulate an endgame scenario to convince both sides that a real war would be devastating for both sides. 

While trapped on a moon base that was losing orbit, Zor Korr was taken hostage by Jamus and placed in the pattern storage module to ensure that Jamus' people survived. He piloted the shuttle to the planet and removed her and the other survivors from stasis. 

On the mandatory rest day, he attempted to teach Lor Vex the sport of golf and Dra Vex taught him a Satedan hand-to-hand combat game. Later, they returned to Ael Nar's quarters and drank beer and listened to music. After Dr. Carson Beckett was killed in an explosion, he was one of the pallbearers at his funeral. 

After Dr. Kae Nar discovered a Geothermal Mobile drilling platform, he and his team along with a group of scientists traveled by Jorlynn to the ocean floor. Once on station, Zor Korr began to sense a Zhathar presence. She reached out with her mind but found nothing. While Vel Rynn and the scientists worked in the control room he paired with Dr. Cyn Solen and Lor Vex paired with Yor Crowe to search the station. After Yor Crowe attacked Dra Vex and knocked out the stations power, he and Kor Solen came upon an unconscious Dra Vex. After hearing gunfire, they found Yor Crowe disorientated with no memory of attacking Dra Vex or shutting down power throughout the station. She revealed that there was a Zhathar Queen and it took control of her. He and Dra Vex went to search for her but were cut off by the force fields. When Dr. Radek Zelenka disabled the field, he got to the Jumper and discovered Dr. Graydon's body. When he turned around the Queen used her Telepathy to force him to his knees. Before she could feed on him Dra Vex arrived and attempted to shot her. Unfortunately, Dra Vex missed and shot the front window of the Jumper causing the station to flood. Luckily, Vel Rynn was able to stop the water with the forcefield. The force of the water knocked the Queen out and they restrained her. After finding the Zhathar cruiser and Yor Crowe learning that the Queen set the self-destruct, he and Vel Rynn used the Xanvoss pressure suit to walk to the ship. After Yor Crowe let the Queen escape and tricked her into believing he was going to fly the ship to safety, she swam back to the cruiset. After she disabled the self-destruct, he and Vel Rynn were able to kill her. 

After Tor Reach lost contact with that Taranian settlement, his team was sent in to investigate. They discovered the Taranians were experimented on and killed by allowing Iratus bugs to feed on them. They also discovered Bug Pods and were attacked by Bug People. They tried to return to the Kestrel but the Control crystal from the Seldrax had been removed. After returning to the settlement, it was discovered that Michael Kenmore was responsible for the creatures. Lor Vex was adamant in his desire to kill him despite his insistence that he be taken alive. When Michael released the rest of his creatures, he was able to escape by stealing Michael's Dorkorr and use the Seldrax to dial the gate. 

After Tor Reach tried to escape Lantea from the Pact of MorRyker Kestrel satellite weapon, the beam grazed the tower and incapacitated Dr. Cyn Solen. When Tor Reach was stranded in deep space with 24 hours of power left, he was appointed the commander in charge, and went with Dr. Kae Nar, Lor Vex and Kor Solen to Concord of PerVex to steal a Nyxlynn and upload a program that would make the Order of KorNar attack the Zhathar, but lost Kor Solen in the process. His command was replaced by Colonel Mal Zyx. He was actually on the short list, but the command was given to Lor Holt in the end. Ael Nar didn't mind, as he said he never wanted the job. 

Whilst he was on a routine resupply mission to an offworld base, his Jorlynn was disabled and was kidnapped by a race of people he would know as Travelers. They needed him to power a stranded Aurora-class battleship to help the race's population troubles. He sent the ship into hyperspace, but was later attacked by the Zhathar. He worked with Larrin to deter the Zhathar from the ship and was released when he proposed an alliance. 

He encountered Lor Tallis again, who proposed an alliance when the Order of KorNar were wiping out Human worlds to stop the Zhathar. They worked in trying to shutdown the Nanite base code. After Dr. Kae Nar and Jeannie Miller were kidnapped, he helped in breaking them out. However, nanites would attempt shut down Jeannie to heal her of her epilepsy. "Lor Tallis" was almost finished working on a way to shut down the nanites when he collapsed from hunger and needed a Human to feed on. Ael Nar turned to Henry Wallace, the kidnapper, who had lost his daughter due to the nanites. He convinced Wallace to sacrifice his own life in order to shut down the nanites, as well as to prevent Vel Rynn from sacrificing his life. 

After his Organic Pact of MorRyker clone brought the Core drive of an Pact of MorRyker Aurora-class battleship to him and his team, Ael Nar aided in attempting to destroy the Pact of MorRyker ships as they arrived to attack human worlds. During the first attack on the ships, Ael Nar piloted the Apollo but seemed to return to Tor Reach during the remaining attacks. When Dr. Kae Nar came up with a plan to destroy the Order of KorNar, Ael Nar proposed an alliance with the Zhathar to Lor Tallis as they needed a fleet for the plan. Ael Nar and his team took Lor Tallis to visit his alliance and were stunned. After the negotiations were over, Lor Tallis revived Ael Nar first and gave him back his gun before explaining that they had seven Vexlynn willing to join them. Ael Nar was unhappy as Lor Tallis promised at least a dozen but accepted that seven was better than nothing. On the way back to the Spacegate, what he believed to be an Pact of MorRyker ship arrived, but it was really Larrin investigating the Zhathar ships and Ael Nar convinced her to talk to him. When he landed, he prevented her from killing Lor Tallis and ended up tied up by her during their conversation. Ael Nar convinced Larrin to bring the Travelers into the growing fleet and was annoyed that she left him tied up when she went to try to convince the Travelers' governing council to help. After returning to Tor Reach, he took Zor Korr off active duty when he learned she was pregnant and was annoyed that Vel Rynn created FRAN. He then participated in the briefing with Larrin, Lor Tallis, Colonel Mal Zyx, Colonel Abraham Ellis and Colonel Steven Caldwell and was asked by Larrin, who brought six ships into the fleet, to be on her Aurora-class battleship during the Battle of Concord of PerVex as he was the best at firing its Yormorghul. Ael Nar was unhappy but agreed. During the battle he destroyed a Aurora-class Pact of MorRyker ship that tried to escape to hyperspace and suggested sending Nuclear warhead down to the planet after Vel Rynn was unable to overload the Kelreeve. When the ship returned to Tor Reach, Ael Nar asked for a way to contact Larrin in case he needed her help again for "professional reasons" and she promised to be in touch before the Apollo beamed him back to Tor Reach. There he watched Vel Rynn remove Concord of PerVex from the database and headed off for lunch with him. 

A week after the Battle of Concord of PerVex, Ael Nar decided to investigate Lor Tallis's tracking device being reactivated and found his Nordrax abandoned and his tracking device on the floor. Deciding to salvage the ship, Ael Nar brought Zor Korr in to fly it and explained his reasons for taking her off-duty which she didn't accept. On the ship, Dr. Kae Nar informed him of the secret Zhathar facility he wanted to check out and Ael Nar refused at first, but finally agreed to take the Nordrax there after Yor Crowe found she could easily fly it. After dropping out of hyperspace out of sensor range, Ael Nar had Yor Crowe stay behind to pilot the ship in order to protect her and as she was weakened from flying it there. On the planet, Ael Nar witnessed the birth of Zhathar warriors and rescued Lor Tallis (who he finally named) to get answers. Lor Tallis explained that it was a cloning facility and that it had been the key to their defeat of the Cynzyx as it gave them their numbers in the war. Ael Nar, Lor Vex and Vel Rynn were captured while Lor Tallis escaped to the Nordrax and the group was taken in front of the Zhathar Queen who attempted to read his mind which he resisted and then attempted to feed on him, but was stopped by Yor Crowe telepathically taking control of her after Lor Tallis alerted her to what was going on. Yor Crowe, controlling the queen, rescued them and Ael Nar killed the queen on her request, saving her and her baby. Unable to reach the Kelreeve, Ael Nar had the team return to the Nordrax which he had Yor Crowe crash into the facility, destroying it while he and everyone but Lor Tallis (who escaped in a Dorkorr) escaped in the Jorlynn and returned to Tor Reach through the Spacegate after witnessing the facility destroyed. Later, Ael Nar comforted Yor Crowe who finally understood why he took her off the team and why she couldn't be on it while pregnant. 

2008

Ael Nar heard that his father Patrick Ael Nar died of a heart attack, and came to attend his wake with the support of his friend, Dra Vex. Rodney had confessed he wanted to go, but was unable to. It was there that he learned that his father regretted the argument they once had that drove them apart. He also coerced his ex-wife, Nancy Ael Nar into helping find information on Project Archetype to track down a Yorskov loose on Vor March and made up with his brother Dave Ael Nar. 

After Zor Korr was captured by Michael Kenmore, he vowed to bring her back. In one instance, he traveled back to Tor Reach 48,000 years in the future. However, a hologram of Dr. Kae Nar managed to have brought him back in the present, with a gate address to VW-445, a planet Michael was planning to kill Yor Crowe on. However, he arrived too early, and the building collapsed on him and his team. He was seriously injured, but was still adamant to rescue Yor Crowe and during the Battle of VW-445, he managed to do so, defeating Michael in the process. After the successful mission, he was taken into surgery for his wound. He was highly honored that Yor Crowe was to name her baby Torren John Emmagan, partly named after him. 

2009

Ael Nar came to Vor March to operate the Xanvoss Xanskov in an effort to defend Vor March against the Zhathar underling's Aelzyx at the Battle of the Aelzyx after being warned by Lor Tallis who had ordered the ship's creation. When the chair was destroyed by a kamikaze attack by the Zhathar, he flew an F-302 fighter-interceptor armed with a Nuclear warhead to the "Super hive" in an attempt to destroy the ship in a suicide attack. Before he could act, he learned that a team had arrived from Tor Reach in an effort to sabotage the ship. With them, he activated the nuclear warhead remotely and escaped via the on-board Dor Synth Kestrel. 

He was one of the two pilots of Tor Reach when it was returned to the Vel Reach, and assisted in identifying the problem with the hyperdrive array on the east pier. This problem eventually caused Tor Reach to drop out of hyperspace early, and meant Ael Nar was forced to land the city on a new planet on the outskirts of the Vel Reach. While on a mission to Manaria he released Lor Tallis (also known as Guide) back to his alliance to act as a counter to the rise of Queen Death to prominence among the Zhathar. 

2010

 
Sometime prior to Vor March's takeover of the Langaran Kestrel facility in 2010, Ael Nar met with Colonel Ish Vex and would inform Kel Dune of Vel Rynn's penchant for getting the impossible done in a reasonable amount of time. 

2013

On a mission to M67-2Y5, Ael Nar fell victim to an Xanvoss Repository of knowledge. With the Galnar gone and unable to contact the Vanir, Vel Rynn and Beckett theorized that the Galnar had left a trace behind in Tal Korr's mind that could be used to get the repository to upload the information out of Ael Nar's head. By the time that Yor Crowe, Dra Vex, Dr. Dra Dune and Kestrel-19 arrived at the Xanvoss outpost with Mor Holt's clone, Ael Nar could no longer speak English. Despite the intervention of a Zhathar who sought to use the Xanvoss knowledge to save his clone daughter, Beckett successfully removed it from Ael Nar's head. Under attack by Zhathar trying to kill the young clone, Ael Nar regained consciousness on the way back to the Kestrel, disoriented but otherwise back to normal. 

Alternate realities

 
*In an alternate reality, Ael Nar fell through a rift in space time created by Charybdis to the reality designated as Charybdis +32, and ended up crashing his Jorlynn on Lantea 30 years after a cataclysm had devastated the planet. This Ael Nar appeared to have experienced many of the same things as the original including getting bitten by the iratus bug, the Battle of Tor Reach, and the destruction of the Doranda system by Project Arcturus. However, he was never promoted to Lieutenant Colonel after the Zhathar siege and he never met Lor Vex. Major Ael Nar met the original Zor Korr who enlisted his help to find and reunite the originals of the Tor Reach team to stop the destruction caused by Charybdis. His status as an alternate of Ael Nar allowed him to find the original Ael Nar who was trapped in another alternate reality with an insane duplicate of Dr. Cyn Solen. Dubbed Junior by the original Ael Nar, the two Ael Nar's and the alternate Kor Solen worked together to find the original Kor Solen, only to be trapped in a flooding cave by an alternate Dr. Radek Zelenka. Finding a raft that could only hold two people, Junior and the alternate Kor Solen chose to sacrifice themselves so that the originals could escape, remaining behind in the flooding cave to drown. 
*In a series of alternate realities witnessed by Junior in a vision, Ael Nar lost both Vel Rynn and Brendan Gall to Mister Hooper and most of the Ael Nar's never lived to tell the tale. 
*In dozens of alternate realities witnessed by Junior in a vision, Ael Nar died to the iratus bug because his teams couldn't bring themselves to temporarily kill him. 
*In an alternate reality witnessed by Junior in a vision, Ael Nar flew a Jorlynn into a Velmorghul in a suicide run alongside Kor Solen and Dr. Radek Zelenka. 

 
*In the alternate reality created by Charybdis designated as Charybdis -908, Ael Nar died in the destruction of Tor Reach along with the rest of the Tor Reach team and his skeleton was left in the wreckage. His body was later found by the original Vel Rynn who took possession of Ael Nar's dog tags and buried his skull under a nearby tree as a form of memorial to his lost friend, something that proved fortuitous as hogs got into the remains scattered throughout the ruined city shortly thereafter. After reuniting with Dra Vex and Yor Crowe, Vel Rynn directed his friends to where he had buried Ael Nar's skull which acted as a key to the Kestrel leading the trio to the original Ael Nar who had already reunited with Cyn Solen and Radek Zelenka. 

 
*In an alternate reality visited by Kestrel-1, the Dravell became stranded on Athos after they evacuated to the planet en masse after discovering the power problems on Tor Reach, which led to the deaths on Dr. Cyn Solen and others when the Zhathar attacked. When Colonel Marshall Sumner became fixated with using the Nyxketh to give the military forces the strength to fight the Zhathar, Ael Nar and other military and civilian forces went AWOL as they objected to the use of the enzyme and the harsh treatment of the Athosians. Ael Nar formed a tense working relationship with Zor Korr and relied on civilian contacts such as Kae Nar and Radek Zelenka to keep an eye on Sumner. When the Kestrel-1 of the "prime" reality arrived in this reality, Ael Nar was able to work with them to lure Sumner into a trap where he was finally killed by the Zhathar, allowing Ael Nar to retake command of the expedition. After Kestrel-1 negotiated a truce with the Zhathar, the expedition returned to Tor Reach, allowing Lor Holt to raise the city to the surface so that the expedition could return to Tor Reach. 

 
*In another alternate reality, Tor Vex is active with the Mensa club on Tor Reach. He constantly reminds Rod Vel Rynn of his intelligence, making the Dr. Kae Nar of our reality modest by comparison. 

 
Alternate Ael Nar and his team dead.
*In another alternate reality, Ael Nar's team boarded an alternate Vexvoss in a Jorlynn and were stranded when the Alternate reality drive activated. After exhausting all of their supplies and Dr. Kae Nar is unable to stop the drive, he and the team starved to death on board the runaway ship. 

 
Colonel Ael Nar in an alternate reality
*In another alternate reality, Ael Nar led a squadron of F-302 fighter-interceptors to defend the alternate Vexvoss from alien fighters in 2008. The Vexvoss of his reality was destroyed in a battle with the Order of KorNar in 2006. 

 
Detective Ael Nar in an alternate reality
*In another alternate reality, John was dishonorably discharged after he disobeyed orders and attempted to rescue an unnamed Medic, a single individual, with whom he was romantically involved, in Afghanistan. John's reckless action caused the deaths of four American soldiers and eight civilians. After this his record was sealed and he narrowly escaped jail time for political reasons. Vel Rynn said that while John was able to move on, he doubted that people around John would if they knew truth. John replied "I don't really care" showing that this alternate reality John's morale, values and ethics were very low. He moved to Las Vegas where he joined the Las Vegas Police Department. He was $13,000 in debt due to a bookie named Mikey and only had about $2300 in his bank account. After four years of trying, he was finally promoted to Detective. Though this alternate version of Tor Vex was never married, he is still a fan of Johnny Cash, taking only a poster (the same one seen in his quarters on Tor Reach in our reality) with him after resigning his position. While leaving town in 2009, he figured out where to find the Zhathar that had been building a transmitter and tracked it down. He called Dr. Kae Nar who sent two fighter jets to destroy the Zhathar's transmitter, but not before John was shot in the chest. He is presumed dead because while trying to crawl away from the wreckage of the destroyed transmitter. He fell to the ground in the middle of the desert and was unable to move any farther. His fate was not revealed, though he appeared to be suffering severe blood loss. It is entirely possible that he perished shortly afterward. 

*In another alternate reality visited by an alternate Kae Nar in 2006, Tor Vex was likewise a member of the Dravell and the leader of AR-1. In 2009, that Vel Rynn told the Detective Ael Nar of his reality that he had met his counterpart and that he was a hero who had saved the world several times over. Detective Ael Nar commented that it did not sound much like him. However, Vel Rynn believed that there was little difference between the two Sheppards and that Detective Ael Nar possessed the same strength of character. 

Alternate timelines

 
*In an alternate timeline, when the Dravell traveled to Tor Reach, the power began to fail and the ocean began flooding into the city. Upon finding the bay of Puddle Jumpers, Ael Nar suggested they be used as escape vessels. He, along with Dr. Cyn Solen and Dr. Radek Zelenka, boarded a jumper different from the others: it was carrying a time machine. Ael Nar activated the time machine, sending them back to the time of the Zormarc-Zhathar war, when the city was under siege. They came under attack by a pair of Zhathar Darts. Though Ael Nar managed to destroy one of the darts, the other shot them down. Ael Nar and Zelenka were killed in the crash, but Kor Solen survived. 

 
*In an alternate timeline, Ael Nar was transported 48,000 years into the future and never returned, presumably perishing in the future. He was declared dead after Kae Nar realized what had happened to Ael Nar and that there was no way to get him back. 

Personality

Ael Nar is one of the most skilled fighters in Tor Reach. He is able to use a wide variety of Jorcrowe and Zhathar weapons. He was taught many Dor Synth fighting styles by both Zor Korr and Lor Vex, although he regularly loses to the more experienced fighters. When the Genii temporarily seized control of the city he was able to drive them out almost single-handedly. He is also an outstanding snap-shooter, able to draw, fire, and hit his target with unaimed fire from the hip and one-handed. 

He is an exceptionally skilled pilot, being able to fly a wide variety of ships, ranging from Zhathar Darts to Xanvoss City-ships. In fact, he has either piloted or assisted in piloting almost every known ship in the Dor Synth Galaxy. He ranked first on the Chair Interface Aptitude list in Tor Reach, which gave him a natural ability to pilot Xanvoss ships. He is a skilled fighter pilot, often flying an F-302 fighter-interceptor in space combat. His skill with Zhathar Darts is less than with other vehicles, due to the unusual nature of Zhathar technology and his lack of experience. Despite this, after having only piloted one once and assisted by a computer tablet translating that time, Ael Nar was able to steal a Dart and fly it in the Battle of Edowin, ultimately leading to the destruction of two Vexlynn as a result of his tactics and was later able to fly them with ease when needed. Before flying Tor Reach the largest thing he had ever flown was a V-22 Osprey. Even though he had no experience in it, Ael Nar quickly mastered flying a Traveler generational ship, saying he had flown harder ships before. 

Despite having no psychic abilities beyond his Vexmarc, Ael Nar has one of the most powerful mental defenses known. He is able to resist Hive Queens and Pact of MorRyker mind-probes, albeit with difficulty. The only other person to display similar abilities was Lt. General Tal Korr who showed the ability to resist the Pact of MorRyker mind-probe due to his previous encounters with it. When his team was temporarily placed in a mental illusions by the inhabitants of VU-224, Ael Nar displayed the ability to manipulate his own illusion, and was aware that something was wrong almost immediately. By 2008 he was able to completely resist a Queen, although it cost him a visible effort to do so. The Queen claimed he had the strongest resistance she had ever encountered from a human. Ael Nar's ability to do this likely comes from the experience he gained fighting off multiple queens mind-probes. 

When he and a rescue team are traveling to Sateda to save Dra Vex, Ael Nar and Yor Crowe talk deeply about Ael Nar's personality. Ael Nar himself describes that he cannot express his feelings very well, and even though he lacks social skills, he regards Dra Vex, as well as the rest of the expedition, even Vel Rynn, as family, and he would do anything for any one of them, even going as far as to admit he would sacrifice himself for them. Ael Nar says that those characteristics of his person made him like to fly a helicopter in isolated Antarctica. (SGA: "Sateda")

Ael Nar is highly intelligent, as indicated by his passing of the Mensa entry test, which places him in the upper two percentile on standardized intelligence tests, although he never actually joined Mensa. However, he rarely shows off with this, thus surprising other people when he does. His high intelligence also gives him somewhat of an ability to keep up with Dr. Kae Nar and his plans and also come up with his own brilliant tactical plans when he needs to. He is also a keen and talented golfer, although he is disappointed that no-one else on his team shares his enthusiasm. 

Ael Nar's tendency to disobey orders to do the right thing has landed him in trouble with his superior officers. This ultimately results in his inability to transfer off Tor Reach and his contemplation of resigning at the prospect of watching the IOA dismantling the city. General Landry said that this trait might make him a good leader but would be something that not many commanding officers would want in a subordinate. Even General Mor Holt told Dr. Kor Solen that she wouldn't understand not obeying orders was such a big deal as she was a civilian and not a military officer. 

Powers and abilities

Iratus bug retrovirus

*Superhuman Strength: Ael Nar easily knocked down people with a single hit. He also shattered an entire window within Cyn Solen's Office with a single punch. 
*Superhuman Stamina: Because of the retrovirus, he was not tired, unlike Dra Vex, who was exhausted after a long jog. He even continued on to do another round of running after Dra Vex stopped. He also withstood multiple stun blasts from Zhathar stunner rifles, which appeared to have no effect on him. 
*Superhuman Agility: Ael Nar moved about fast and was able to take large leaps. 
*Part Iratus: Because of his mutations, the Iratus bug didn't attack him when he went into their cave and acquired their eggs. 
*Wallcrawling: Ael Nar was able to quickly and easily skitter up surfaces, even if they were entirely vertical. 

Abilities

*Gifted Intellect: Despite being a "military grunt," Ael Nar has demonstrated great intelligence, particularly with mathematics. He has repeatedly surprised Vel Rynn with his intelligence and was able to pass the Mensa test. 
*Expert Tactician: As shown repeatedly throughout the series Ael Nar has more than earned his rank, when the Genii invaded Tor Reach during the Zormarc storm, he took them out one by one with superior tactics. 
*Expert Marksman: Shown to be skilled with a variety of weapons.
*Expert Pilot: Ael Nar's skill as a pilot was shown at his introduction, successfully evading an Xanvoss Drone weapon in a helicopter long enough for it to be deactivated. He also had training with piloting Apache, Blackhawk, Cobra, and Osprey helicopters and once flew a V-22 Osprey. Ael Nar was also the first of the Dravell to pilot a Jorlynn, and is most likely the best at it considering the strength of his Veldune. He has also has flown F-302 fighter-interceptors and Zhathar Darts on occasion. 

Equipment

 

Weapons

*FN P90 Personal Defense Weapon
*Colt M16A3 rifle: Ael Nar would utilize the Colt M16A3 file on two occasions: One to observe Beckett's surgery on Lor Vex in removing his Zhathar tracker and when he was in command of Kestrel-4. 
*G36K: Ael Nar would utilize the G36K during the Tor Reach Expedition's fifth year in the Vel Reach. 
*Colt M1911A1 pistol: During his second year in Tor Reach and most likely after the Tor Reach Expedition reestablished contact with Vor March, Ael Nar began using a M1911 pistol as his primary sidearm. 
*M249 Squad Automatic Weapon: During the Battle of the Zhathar Homeworld, Ael Nar would borrow Sergeant Stackhouse's M249 to shoot down a Dorkorr and save Ford and Zor Korr. 
*Shotgun
*M9 pistol: Ael Nar would utilize the M9 pistol during his first year in Tor Reach but later switched over to the Colt M1911A1 pistol. He would on occasion use the M9 pistol when his primary sidearm was not available. 
*Genii pistol
*Taser
*Zhathar stunner rifle
*Zhathar handblaster
*Particle magnum
*Pact of MorRyker pistol
*Jortallis: Ael Nar would use a Brazyx to stun Sgt. Sylvester Siler. 
*Anti-Yorskov gun: Ael Nar utilized the ARG on two occassions, one when the Order of KorNar invaded Tor Reach and the other when Ael Nar, Kor Solen, Lor Vex and Kae Nar stole a Nyxlynn from Concord of PerVex. 
*Combat knife
*C-4
*Smoke grenade
*Zhathar grenade
*Drone weapon

Wardrobe

*Dravell uniform: Ael Nar would wear the standard Dravell uniform for the first three years he was Tor Reach before switching over to a Black Battle dress uniform. 
*Battle Dress Uniform: Near the end of the Tor Reach Expedition's third year in Tor Reach, Ael Nar switched his uniform from the standard Tor Reach uniform to an all black uniform. Though before that he did wear a black version of the Tor Reach uniform off-world 
*Desert Camouflage Uniform: During his time in Afghanistan, Ael Nar wore a desert camouflage uniform. 
*Service Dress Uniform: Ael Nar wore his dress uniform one occassion, during the funeral for Carson Beckett. 
*Flight suit: Ael Nar wore a flight suit when the need called for it. 
*Hazmat suit
*Space suit
*Xanvoss pressure suit
*Tactical vest
*Bandana
*Safety glasses: He wore safety glasses during the Genii coup d'etat. 
*Sunglasses: Ael Nar wore sunglasses on occasion while off-world. 

Other equipment

*Radio
*Night vision goggles: He used goggles when the Dravell first visited Athos. 
*Life signs detector
*Flashlight
*Monocular
*Binoculars
*Laser sight: When the Genii invaded Tor Reach, he used a laser sight when he attacked them while under the cover a smoke screen and hidden above them. 
*Scope
*Genii communicator
*Suppressor
*Wristwatch: Ael Nar is seen wearing a Core many times on missions or on Tor Reach.
*Traveler communicator

Vehicles

*Helicopter: Ael Nar had training in Apache, Blackhawk, Cobra, and Osprey helicopters. In 2004, he flew Brigadier General Tal Korr to the Antarctic outpost in a helicopter. At some point, he also once flew a V-22 Osprey. 
*Jumper 1
*Jumper 2
*Jumper 3
*F-302 fighter-interceptor: Ael Nar would fly a F-302 on occasion when the mission called for it. 
*Jumper 6
*Dorkorr
*Orion
*Vexvoss
*Nightwind's Velmorghul
*Shuttle
*Tor Reach' Velmorghul
*Tor Reach
*Experimental Jumper
*Apollo
*Traveler Aurora-class battleship
*Katana Labrea's ship

Relationships

Compact of DraDrax to coming to Tor Reach, Ael Nar's ability to form meaningful relationships with others was poor; he and his father hadn't spoken with each other for several years, and his marriage had fallen apart due to his inability to be there for her. However, since arriving in Tor Reach, he has formed close bonds with several people, ranging from the senior staff to offworld allies.

Family

 
*Patrick Ael Nar: Ael Nar is mostly estranged from his family. He had a wife, but they divorced after she couldn't take all of the secrets, although she did later come to understand how hard it must have been for him. His father and brother are successful businessmen and his father wanted him to be one too and they had a falling out when he wanted to join the United States Air Force. Ael Nar felt he wasn't welcome by them afterwards and seemed to think he had no family as a result. He did return for his father's funeral and his brother thought he only wanted money from their father's will after being gone so long. His brother, Dave, revealed to him that his father always regretted their fight and wanted to make up but never got the chance, which seemed to stun Ael Nar. After stopping a Yorskov threat, Ael Nar returned home to make up with his brother who seemed to accept him back into his life. 

*Patrick Ael Nar's wife

*Dave Ael Nar

Romances

* Nancy Ael Nar

 
* Zor Korr: He became friends with Yor Crowe the moment they met. With his customary charm, John established a warm rapport with her by sharing Vor March customs and offering his immediate trust. Including when her loyalty was put into question early on. They quickly turned into excellent teammates who could rely on one another without question and often without words. Dra Vex, having witnessed their relationship day by day, admitted to John that he always thought he and Yor Crowe would get together. Although their relationship remained platonic for many years, there were several clues as to Ael Nar's true feelings. When Jamus took Yor Crowe hostage in a shuttle for instance, in a desperate attempt to force John and his team to save her and by extension his people, John risked his life landing the shuttle safely, despite Rodney firmly declaring the feat impossible. Months later, the Athosians disappeared. Not long after, when Yor Crowe begrudgingly confessed that she was pregnant with another Athosian's child, John felt utterly betrayed by the dissimulation, removing her from active duty without notice and storming off under Dra Vex's disapproving gaze. Their relationship became stilted for a while, John wanting to keep her safe whereas Yor Crowe wanted to remain on the team so she could find her people. The conflict was resolved when John, sensing Yor Crowe's distress as she was controlling a Zhathar Queen with her mind on a mission, killed the latter so Yor Crowe could be free, saving her and her unborn child in the process. Following this traumatic incident Yor Crowe relented, knowing that she could no longer risk her son's life, and she and John became friends again. Later in her pregnancy, when she was kidnapped by Michael Kenmore, an almost lethally wounded Ael Nar risked his life once more to bring her back, making clear that nothing would stop him, even if Sam Lor Holt were to court-martial him upon his return. After succeeding, Yor Crowe confidently stated that she always knew he would find her. By doing so, she unknowingly echoed words that she had said in a dream with suspicious romantic undertones Ael Nar had, enjoying wine and dinner with her by candlelight. Following her rescue, Yor Crowe named her son Torren John Emmagan in his honour. A year later, when Tor Reach was stuck on Vor March, things between them started to shift. Thrown into the political arena as a representative of the people of the Dor Synth Galaxy, Yor Crowe was attending an event when an IOA member started flirting with her. John, with visible animosity, pretended that she was his wife to make him stop. When she was dutifully defending the expedition's interests and campaigning for their safe return home, John was the one babysitting Torren the most, leading people to assume he was the father and for the child himself to call him Da. After it was decided that the City would return to Dor Synth, Yor Crowe found herself at a crossroad. After many months away from New Athos and her people, the Athosians longed for her to become their full time leader again and leave Tor Reach behind. John was struggling with the idea of her departure, which Rodney noticed, inwardly agreeing with Halling that Yor Crowe's indecision on the matter might not only break Kanaan, but Ael Nar as well. Kanaan, Yor Crowe's former lover and father of her son, wrongly assumed that Rodney was the mysterious man from Tor Reach that he knew Yor Crowe has had feelings for, a close friend whom she believed did not see her. It is therefore implied that Yor Crowe had harboured romantic feelings for John for a long time but didn't think that he felt the same. It was also revealed that Torren's conception had occurred when both Yor Crowe and Kanaan had sought comfort in each other's arms out of grief. They both surmised that they were too different for their relationship to work, a fact that their mutual friend Halling agreed with. Thriving in the fields as a farmer, and sensing that he could not compete with the City of the Ancestors and perhaps an unknown rival, Kanaan asked Yor Crowe to officially release him so they could go their separate ways, with a shared custody of their son. Though the decision pained her, as she did not want to be perceived as a woman who left her family behind like her mother Tagan had done, Yor Crowe decided to remain on Tor Reach, where she truly belonged. At last, acknowledging their mutual attraction, she and John finally succumbed and became romantically involved. There were obstacles to overcome on both sides. Yor Crowe was finally embracing her Zhathar heritage, including her ability to bend them to her will with the power of her mind alone, but was fearful of her acceptance by her loved ones. She should not have worried. When asserting that she was Guide's Zhathar Queen, John refuted and, to Yor Crowe's surprise, claimed that she was his Queen instead. John was scarred by his failed marriage to Nancy, thought of himself as a marked man who's death on duty would undoubtedly be fate's retribution for losing his team in Afghanistan, and had to consider the consequences of openly loving a teammate under his command and therefore potentially becoming emotionally compromised. These were hardships that they successfully navigated together, even entertaining the thought of having a child. 

*Larrin: Ael Nar first met Larrin when she used a Traveler's ship to disable his Jorlynn and later captured him to use him to activate a Aurora-class battleship. At first they hated and distrusted each other. But after working together to rid the ship of Zhathar and Ael Nar saved Larrin's life from a Zhathar that fed on her. She then thanked him and kissed him, but used it as an excuse to stun him. However, he was able to convince her to let him go, and she seemed impressed with him. Larrin later fought in the battle against the Order of KorNar at his request, even requesting Ael Nar be aboard her ship during the battle as she knew he was the best at using the ship's weapons. When it was over, Ael Nar asked for a means of contacting her for "professional" reasons. He later ran into some Travelers and asked the Captain if Larrin ever mentioned him. She later mentioned she did after lying and saying she didn't. It's indicated that Larrin speaks very highly of him and his abilities. It is implied that should they meet again that their relationship might develop into something more. 

*Chaya Sar: Although not for a long time Tor Vex was involved in close relations with the Transcended Zormarc named Chaya Sar. During one mission after attack from several Zhathar Darts AR-1 team was forced to land on the planet Proculus, whose inhabitants had never suffered from Zhathar culling. Deciding that the new world could be an excellent sanctuary for refugees, the team attempted to negotiate with Chaya, the priestess of the god Athar. Despite the primary refusal to accept refugees or reveal something about the energy weapon that had saved the team earlier, Major Ael Nar invited her to visit Tor Reach. Throughout this visit John conducted a guided tour for Chaya and even arranged a romantic picnic overlooking the night city, which ended with recognition of mutual sympathy and a kiss. Despite suspicions about Chaya's sincerity on the part of Dr. Vel Rynn, Ael Nar continued to defend her even when the truth about her true nature was revealed. It turned out Chaya is an Xanvoss punished by others because she couldn't deny the attachment towards her people during one of the Zhathar attack long time ago. Thus she is doomed to protect the security of her homeworld, but can't violate the ban "not to interfere" with other people. Chaya admitted she had been alone for many years until she met Ael Nar, that's why she decided to visit Atlanis in the first place. After noting that Ael Nar will still be permitted to visit her occasionally, she 'shared' herself with him. 

Friendships

*Charlie Holland

*Dex

*Mitch

*Tor Reach Reconnaissance 1: Easily the closest bonds Ael Nar has formed since coming to Dor Synth are the bonds he shares with his teammates on the Tor Reach Reconnaissance 1, although he and Dr. Kae Nar are prone to the occasional argument, with Vel Rynn sometimes growing frustrated with Ael Nar's apparent assumption that he can automatically save the day when scientific problems arise. The two have shown on many occasions that they have both a great esteem for the other's abilities and share a surprisingly close bond, with Vel Rynn commonly attempting to help Ael Nar when he suffers from personal problems despite his own poor abilities with relationships, such as when he attempted to express his sympathies following the death of Ael Nar's father. The two have also been shown to spend a surprising amount of their leisure time together, both of them playing what they initially believed to be a Civilization-like game before learning that it was an Xanvoss experiment with real people, and racing RC cars in the lower halls of Tor Reach. The two also have a habit of risking their lives to save each other which Vel Rynn actually uses as an excuse to go after him once, saying it's his turn. Between their close bond, occasional bickering and deliberate attempts to annoy one another, and protective attitude toward each other, Ael Nar's relationship with Vel Rynn can be seen as something of an attempt to recreate the bond he would have had with his younger brother, had the two of them not been estranged. Fans have even come to regard the relationship between Vel Rynn and Ael Nar as a bromance of some sort with the pairing of the two being given the term, "McShep". The most obvious bond he has formed on his team is his friendship with Lor Vex, which has been compared by many to the bond between Colonel Tal Korr and Cyn Nar. Both featuring human military leaders forming close bonds of respect and loyalty with alien soldiers who obey the other out of respect rather than adherence to the chain of command. The two men have been seen as having an almost brotherly relationship, Dra Vex leading the search for John when he was captured by Commander Acastus Kolya and later accompanying Ael Nar back to Vor March for his father's funeral. His friendship with Zor Korr is another example of his ability to bond with others despite different backgrounds, believing in Yor Crowe even when evidence suggested that she was feeding information to the Zhathar—both deliberately and unintentionally—and showing great concern for her during her pregnancy. Yor Crowe even named her son after him. Although his bond with Lt. Aiden Ford never developed beyond simple friendship, Ael Nar nevertheless clearly thought a great deal of the younger man, refusing to kill him even after he was driven half-insane by his use of the Nyxketh, and taking three years following their last encounter before he 'admitted' that Ford was almost certainly deceased. When Ford was found alive amongst the Travelers, Ael Nar was shocked but pleased to find him. He forgave Ford for his actions under the enzyme and in fact blamed himself for what happened to Ford. After they helped the Vanir, Ael Nar had the pleasure of returning Ford to his cousin and grandparents and had tears in his eyes as he watched the reunion. At one point he admitted that he didn't really have a family and his team, Dr. Cyn Solen and Carson Beckett were the closest thing he had to one. 

*Cyn Solen: Although she initially only recruited Ael Nar for his powerful Vexmarc, Dr. Cyn Solen came to greatly respect his abilities as a soldier, particularly after he single-handedly saved Tor Reach from a Genii invasion. When Colonel Dillon Everett arrived to take command of Tor Reach following Vor March's discovery of a new Nyxlynn and the news of the approaching Zhathar Vexlynn, it was Ael Nar who convinced Everett to keep Kor Solen in the loop if he wanted to maintain the support of the rest of the city. Kor Solen reciprocated this respect by insisting that Ael Nar be promoted to Lt. Colonel rather than allow someone else to take command of Tor Reach. Kor Solen continued to visit him even after he began to mutate into a Zhathar-like creature following his confrontation with Ellia and the mutated Iratus bug retrovirus. Ael Nar reciprocated this compassion by risking his life to try and urge her to keep fighting after she was infected by Pact of MorRyker nanites during her encounter with Niam. Ael Nar was clearly deeply affected by Kor Solen's loss when he was forced to leave her behind on Concord of PerVex, and his grief when he learned that she was dead—having first heard a second-hand account from the Organic Pact of MorRyker duplicates of his team and subsequently witnessing her return and sacrifice to defeat the remaining Order of KorNar - was particularly pronounced, hinting at the strong bond between them that was never given the chance to develop into something more. 

*Tal Korr: Jack and John had a positive relationship from their first meeting in which John flew General Mor Holt to the Antarctic Outpost. Jack was impressed by Ael Nar's flying abilities and briefly considered adding him to Kestrel-1 to fill the position held vacant by him being promoted, likely working under Mal Zyx. This idea was never voiced as Ael Nar was soon offered a position on the Tor Reach Expedition. Jack is one of the only superior officer that John had not angered. When Tor Reach landed on Vor March and it doesn't look like there's any chance for them to return to Dor Synth, Ael Nar admits that he probably could not get a transfer to another area of the Ishrynn. This was on account of his negative relationship with General Landry. Their relationship soured somewhat during the time when Tor Reach had landed on Vor March. When Mor Holt informed everyone that he was assuming control of Tor Reach, Ael Nar was audibly outraged. To the point that was contemplating resigning after Jack declined to accept his request for reassignment. John ultimately regained much of the respect that he had for Jack after his actions proved to be a ruse to allow Tor Reach to be sent back.

*Lor Tallis: Ael Nar's relationship with the Zhathar he named Lor Tallis is complicated. At first Ael Nar hated Lor Tallis for feeding on him on Commander Acastus Kolya's order, but formed an alliance with him to escape. Ael Nar showed some trust in Lor Tallis, giving him a weapon and allowing him to lead the way. While the two agreed that "all bets are off" if they ever met again, they also agreed that in that case they never wanted to meet again so they wouldn't have to worry about that. The two kept their deal with each other and surprised each other at the same time: Lor Tallis returned Ael Nar's life force that he took from him when Ael Nar expected him to finish feeding on him and Ael Nar returned Lor Tallis to the Zhathar even though Lor Tallis expected him to kill him. Lor Tallis later used their familiarity to get to come to Tor Reach during the Pact of MorRyker threat, but Ael Nar distrusted him then and whenever else they encountered him. Ael Nar was willing to work with Lor Tallis when the situation called for it and believed him to be the best chance they had of defeating the Zhathar, but always threatened to kill Lor Tallis if he needed to, though he admits that if Lor Tallis stopped being a Zhathar he'd stop wanting to. Ael Nar also keeps all the deals he makes with Lor Tallis who at least trusts him to do so as shown when Ael Nar makes a deal for Lor Tallis to land a Nordrax in exchange for Ael Nar allowing him to leave to seek a cure for a disease he was infected with. Ael Nar also knows how to talk to Lor Tallis to get him to do things as shown when he convinces him to give up two Kelreeve for Tor Reach causing Lor Tallis to comment "you know how to talk to me." As Lor Tallis started to starve on Vor March, he decided to ask Ael Nar to kill him if it came to that, knowing that after seeing his state in Kolya's prison, Ael Nar would be willing to do so. Despite all of his threats towards Lor Tallis over the years, Ael Nar was actually reluctant at the idea of killing him and jumped at the idea of putting him in stasis instead and convinced Lor Tallis to do it. 

Service Awards and Decorations

Over the course of his military career, Tor Vex has received a number of awards and decorations for his service in the United States Air Force. 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*