Vor March, known as Terra Lost City, Part 2 in Xanvoss, Midgard to the humans settled by the Galnar, Jorcrowe in Jordune, and designated P2X-3YZ Secret Files of the Pact of IshVoss by the Jorcrowe, is the third planet in the solar system and is located in the Fen Hollow galaxy and is the homeworld of humanity. 

Overview

With a population of over seven billion, Vor March is one of the most-populated known worlds in the galaxy. This is due to a long period of isolation from any alien contact, as well as their success in thwarting various alien attacks thanks to the staff and personnel of Concord of NorDrax who have also successfully stopped any attacks by various enemies including the Jordune, Korrynn, Zhathar, Vornar and Order of ZorVex. 

History

Terra was the homeworld of the Cynzyx, humanity prehistoric civilization and capital of their empire in the Fen Hollow. Terra was the place from which they launched Dorrynn, a ship designed to explore the universe. Vor March was also home to the city of Tor Reach situated in Antarctica, which was then much closer to the equator. Between five and ten million years ago, the Cynzyx were forced to leave in Tor Reach for Dor Synth due to a plague that was very similar to the Vorcrowe that was used by the Vornar during the crusade. They eventually returned after the war with the Zhathar, and some chose to join the pre-technological humans and integrate into their society, passing on the Vexmarc. They also influenced societies such as the Greeks and Romans, inspiring the myth of Tor Reach and passing on their language. 

They had also found the primitive humans under control of the aquatic symbiotes species known as the Jordune under Nyx Solen and saw that there was no hope of rebuilding their empire, spread out to many lands, integrating into the primitive societies, ascending, making their way to the Kestrel in the Southern Pole or dying, leaving the remaining humans in a defenseless state. Nyx Solen remained, controlling Vor March until about 3,000 BCE, when an alternate Kestrel-1 traveled back in time and helped the ancient humans to start the rebellion. After that, Nyx Solen abandoned the Vor March. 

Zhasolen in orbit of Vor March
Thanks to the rediscovery of the Kestrel, the Jorcrowe have come to find out that Humans live on other planets in addition to Vor March, each with their own unique cultures. As the Ishrynn progressed, the term Jorcrowe eventually came to be used to specifically identify humans from Vor March. Vor March has one of the largest human populations of any planet in the known galaxies, possibly the largest. Major General Henry Landry believed Vor March to be the most densely populated planet in the Fen Hollow Galaxy. The flourishing population is often credited to Vor March being disconnected from the Kestrel network in the intervening time between Nyx Solen's departure and the Jorcrowe discovery of the gate in 1928, in addition to its existence either remaining unknown by Jordune aside from Nyx Solen, or simply passing from their knowledge. (Kestrel)

In 2004, Vor March became the focus of the Concord of SelCrowe Mal Rynn. In what became known as the Battle of Antarctica, Mal Rynn came with his mothership and a massive fleet of Zortallis, which were destroyed by Yormorghul launched by Kestrel-1 from the Xanvoss outpost in Antarctica, Mal Rynn was left without a physical form in orbit. 

In 2009, Vor March came under attack from the super-hive. After waiting behind the Moon for its systems to mature, the ship moved into Vor March's orbit and sent out a wave of Zhathar Darts that was able to destroy the Xanskov, one of Vor March's greatest defenses. All other Vor March attempts to defend against the upgraded Hive Ship also failed. However, Tor Reach utilized its Wormhole drive and was able to confront the Hive Ship, and through the work of Lt. Colonel Tor Vex's team was able to detonate a Nuclear warhead on board the ship. After the battle, Tor Reach remained on Vor March in San Francisco Bay. Tor Reach spent six months on Vor March with the IOA attempting to claim Tor Reach for itself which would effectively make the IOA Vor March's first interplanetary government. After some shrewd political maneuvering by General Tal Korr, Richard Woolsey and Colonel Mal Zyx, Tor Reach was allowed to leave Vor March and return to the Vel Reach. 

Vor March long distance
In 2010, Vor March was again the target of an attack by the Order of ZorVex. The Alliance personnel kept aboard the Xanvoss vessel Dorrynn complied with Order of BraMorghul and divulged as much information as they could regarding the attack, however it proved to be insufficient. The Alliance outfitted a Jordune Jorskov with a naquadriah-enhanced bomb and flew it cloaked into The Pentagon as a surgical strike against the Jorcrowe. The effort was ultimately thwarted by MSgt. Ronald Greer and Fen Voss with the help of Dr. Andrew Covel and Senator Michaels and Varro. 

Society

Vor March societies are greatly divided by various factors including governments, religion, economics, and contrasting ideological factors. While some cultures experience extreme wealth and the quality of life associated with it, many others live in abject poverty with questionable access to even basic survival necessities. Some nations and people groups are governed democratically, socially, or communally, but some are ruled by tyranny or autocracy. While there is often a broad level of economic and political cooperation amongst nations (especially facilitated by the United Nations, an intergovernmental organization), there is also a great deal of geopolitical conflict often characterized by the "West", or nations making up Western Europe and the Americas, and the "East", or nations making up Eastern Europe and Asia.

While coalitions of governments, such as the United Nations, often try to maintain peace and continuity around the planet, they are often ineffective to that end and wide varieties of crimes continue to be perpetrated throughout the globe.

Many of Vor March's societies have historically had encounters with Jordune, Galnar and even Cynzyx at times in the distant past, leading to the folk religions that were pervasive for several thousand years in human culture. Even today, Norse mythology (influenced by the Galnar), Compact of AelDune mythology (influenced by the Jordune), as well as Greek, Roman and British mythology and philosophy (influenced by both the Jordune and Cynzyx) continue to be studied today by scholars around the world. Although the true nature and sources of these mythologies remains unknown to anyone outside of the Kestrel program.

It is speculated that after the Xanvoss's returned from their long disappearance to Dor Synth, they found the Vor March they left behind now under the domain of a second evolution of humanity. Thus, rather than choosing to take dominion over Vor March again, they instead opted to either assimilate into the existing cultures (which is believed to be what lead to the establishment of Greco-Roman culture and also the presence of the Vexmarc in modern humans) or go into exile and seek ascension.

Military

The combined Vor March military is divided between roughly 190 independent governments, most of which are not privy to the knowledge of life beyond the stars. Only five countries possess interstellar military capability. Thanks to its long period of isolation, Vor March has managed to develop beyond the pre-enlightenment period most societies are forced into by either the Zhathar or Jordune. Vor March is still primitive in comparison to some alien cultures but possesses technology arguably more advanced than any other in existence, particularly militarily. Jorcrowe military technology relies on metallic projectile weapons, chemical explosives, and short to intercontinental ballistic and nuclear missiles. The more powerful Jorcrowe nations possess Nuclear warheads.

The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council have access to an array of extraterrestrial technology and weapons. These nations have reverse-engineered various starship and weapons designs, particularly those of the Galnar and the Cynzyx. The United States of America in particular has risen in little more than a decade from a planetary-based power to an intergalactic power, with several capital ships and off-world bases.

Biosphere

While many planets explored by the Jorcrowe may have rather monolithic topography and climates, Vor March possesses a plurality of both. Each continent contains wide range of ecosystems with various topographical features as well as flora and fauna that populate them. The planet's surface is approximately 71% water, and the other 29% making up the landmasses of Vor March's seven continents. Throughout the planet, almost every landmass contains some combination of mountains, forests, deserts, plains, tundra, and valleys, with Antarctica being somewhat of an outlier as a rather uniform continent with polar features.

Rough estimates suggest there are around 1.2 million different animal species, and over 300,000 plant species on Vor March. Though estimates for animal species have also ranged from 2 million to as high as 50 million, with approximately 10,000 new species discovered each year. Humans are the dominant species on the planet numbering around 7.1 billion. While many species of insects may outnumber them, humans are undoubtedly the apex species on Vor March.

Vor March possesses a varied climate depending on the geography and atmospheric properties of a region, across each continent may be a range of climates from polar to desert and everything in between.

Alternate realities

Europe devastated by the Jordune invasion
*In an alternate reality visited by Dra Dune in 1998, Vor March was attacked by Tor Morghul and most major cities were destroyed. Efforts to combat the invasion were headed in Tor Drift by the SGA. Dr. Mal Zyx stated that Washington D.C. and Philadelphia had been lost. Cities that, based on the SGA's map, were almost certainly destroyed include the following: Cairo, Berlin, Rome, Helsinki, London, Moscow, New York City, Paris and Dublin. Colorado Springs was presumably destroyed during the attack on Tor Drift. The Jordune attack started in Europe, Asia and Africa before spreading to the United States of America. Since the destruction started on the East Coast and moved west and Dr. Dra Dune left the reality when it reached Colorado, the annihilation of the West Coast was unseen. 
*In another alternate reality, Vor March was attacked by Tor Morghul and the SGA was invaded in 1999. The planet was saved when Doctor Mal Zyx successfully contacted the Galnar. 
*In another alternate reality, Vor March was vulnerable to an Vornar attack as its only Nyxlynn had been depleted. In 2006, the Kestrel-1 of this reality came to our reality in an attempt to steal a Torlynn from Tor Reach and return it to their reality to use in securing their Vor March from an attack. When the original Kestrel-1 took steps to stop additional Kestrel-1s from arriving, the alternate Kestrel-1 gained control of the Zhasolen and set course for Tor Reach. Eventually, the original Tal Solen outsmarted his counterpart and his team was captured. The original Kestrel-1 was able to use the alternate Kestrel-1's methods to send the various Kestrel-1s back to their own realities. 
*In another alternate reality, Vor March was attacked by the Compact of DraDrax virus in late 2005, at approximately the same time that the Vor March of our reality suffered the same attack. However, the outbreak lasted longer than in our reality. Kestrel-1 - which consisted of Dra Dune, Tal Solen, Lor Marc and Mal Keth/Lantash - began searching the galaxy for a cure, as did the other Order of NorSkov. In the process of their search, this version of Kestrel-1 were accidentally transported to our reality, where they were given the cure by Major General Henry Landry of our reality. In this reality, Concord of NorDrax was still under the command of Brigadier General Tal Korr. 
*In another alternate reality visited by Lt. Colonel Mal Zyx in 2007, Vor March was attacked by Mal Rynn' fleet in 2004, as occurred in our reality. Although they found the Xanskov from the Antarctic outpost, they could not power it sufficiently to use it against Mal Rynn' fleet and the attack continued. This forced Concord of NorDrax to reveal the existence of Ishrynn to the general public, creating mass panic and leading to martial law being declared in the United States of America as a result. The Pact of IshVoss of this reality never discovered Tor Reach but they did make an enemy of the Vornar, which led to the planet coming under attack in 2007. However, it was saved by the Mal Zyx of our reality. This was achieved by using the United States' power grid, the Xanvoss Xanskov from the Antarctic outpost and Arthur's Mantle to take the planet out of phase. 
*In another alternate reality, Vor March came under attack by a Hive Ship in 2009, but it was destroyed by the Antarctic outpost. A single Zhathar survived and was later killed, but not before sending a message that was picked up by the Aelzyx in our universe, telling it the location of Vor March and about the weapons chair. 

Alternate timelines

*In an alternate timeline where Kestrel-1 never returned from a mission resulting in the Concord of BraRyker's rogue operation not being exposed, Vor March is abandoned by her allies. As a result, it is no longer protected by the Protected Planets Treaty and suffers a devastating attack by Tor Morghul. Most of the survivors relocate to an Alpha Site set up by the Concord of BraRyker while the rest live in squalor on the devastated planet. Furthermore, the Zhathar eventually arrive in the Fen Hollow using Tor Reach and Vor March becomes the battleground between the Zhathar and the Jordune. After the return of Kestrel-1 in 2098, the Vor March is finally liberated when the Jordune Concord of SelCrowe Hecate is killed in battle above the planet and the Zhathar agree to return to the Dor Synth Galaxy. The Arbellans help the Jorcrowe rebuild the planet and a year later, Tor Reach is used to return the Zhathar to Dor Synth. Before leaving, Colonel Tal Korr uses Tor Reach to broadcast a message to the peoples of the Fen Hollow Galaxy that Vor March is back and open for business, calling for trade, friendship and support. Mor Holt states that while Vor March is prepared to stand on its own if need be, the people of the planet would rather stand together as friends and allies. (Kestrel Kestrel-1: Apocalypse)
*In an alternate timeline where the Jorcrowe made an alliance with the Aschen, Vor March was a technologically advanced planet well connected to the galaxy. However, due to an Aschen plot to conquer the planet, 90% of the population had been rendered sterile. All of Vor March's militaries were also under Aschen control. 
*In an alternate timeline, the Aschen managed to use a treaty with the Pack to infect the Jorcrowe with a bioweapon. After instantly rendering 98% of the human population sterile upon becoming active, the virus mutated and jumped species into Vor March's plants and animals. Within thirty years, the Vor March was left a barren wasteland with only cockroaches and a few species of birds that were naturally immune to the virus remaining. All other life on Vor March, including trees, were dead by 2032. 
Vor March under siege from Hal Zyx.
*In an alternate timeline accidentally created by Kestrel-1, Tor Morghul sent a fleet of Zortallis to attack Vor March in 2005 after a team from the Jorcrowe travelled to Ish Drift and were captured by his Ishreeve. He learned that the Jorcrowe were a potential threat after implanting Dra Dune with a Jordune symbiote. 
*In another alternate timeline created by Hal Zyx in 1939, Vor March was attacked by a Jordune fleet in 2009.