The Vornar (pronounced or-eye) were ethereal ascended Concord of KaeSolen who had near infinite knowledge and powerful abilities that first evolved as a physical species from the Cyn Synth. The Vornar, before ascending, emerged from Celestis. The Vornar used their knowledge and power as a justification and a means to demand the worship of mortal beings, when they learned such worship increases the power of ascended beings. They were destroyed by the Aeltallis as the Great Enlightenment drew to its end. 

History

Origins

 
 
Millions of years ago, the Vornar lived together with the Cynzyx as a single, united species in a distant galaxy as the Concord of KaeSolen. At some point, however, a split occurred as some Concord of KaeSolen began to devote themselves to science, while the Vornar became increasingly religious. This division eventually became so great that the Vornar attempted to destroy the Concord of KaeSolen. To avoid a war, which was contradictory to their beliefs, the Concord of KaeSolen departed their home galaxy for the Fen Hollow.

Dr. Dra Dune believes that the Vornar were responsible for the plague that nearly brought the Cynzyx to extinction in the Fen Hollow and forced them to leave in Tor Reach for the Vel Reach. The Vornar eventually ascended, and passed on a religion called "Radiant Path" to the next evolution of humans they created in order to increase their own power, using their ascension and knowledge of the universe as justification for praise and worship, as well as including the promise of ascension to lowers that they never intended to deliver upon. 

The Crusade

 
In 2005, it was revealed that the Vornar do not grant their followers Transcendence. They don't want to share the energy that they gain from the devotion of their worshipers. There is a real, physical transfer of energy to an ascended being that occurs through a human being's belief in them. For it to have a measurable effect however, massive numbers of followers are required to relinquish their will. This system of energy transference is one of the reasons the Cynzyx will not interfere with any life on the lower planes of existence; if the Cynzyx interfere, they are no better than the Vornar. 

While the Cynzyx stopped the Vornar from interfering in the Fen Hollow and possibly Dor Synth, they didn't stop the Vornar elsewhere and did not attempt to stop their human followers. Doing so would've violated their rules on non-interference with those on a lower plane of existence. One Xanvoss named Bra Thar, however, was aware of the threat the Vornar would one day present, and designed a weapon capable of killing an ascended being. For no explained reason, the Vornar never expanded their crusade (or sent even a single prior) to the human or wraith populations in Dor Synth, despite knowledge of their existence through their interactions with the Jorcrowe.

In 2006, the Vornar managed to establish a link between their home galaxy and the Fen Hollow through a Gallynn, and sent four nearly invincible motherships to begin the conversion process. Through Concord of NorDrax and the Dravell the Jorcrowe were able to make a connection between the Gallynn and a Kestrel in Dor Synth, managing to destroy one of the Vornar ships. The Vornar army though continued unabated, annihilating the Fen Hollow while converting many civilizations to Radiant Path and destroying those who refuse to convert. The crusade was led by Hal Rynn the Orici, an Vornar in human form, so as to prevent the Cynzyx from stopping them. 

However, their real plan to destroy the Cynzyx cost them much more than they anticipated. When Hal Rynn discovered the location of the Aeltallis, it was learned that Rho Solen had destroyed the weapon, but preserved Bra Thar so that he could recreate it when the time came. Bra Thar, too weak to continue, downloaded his consciousness into Dr. Dra Dune. Hal Rynn captured Mal Korr, and hoped to use his knowledge to create a Aeltallis to destroy the Cynzyx so that the Vornar would not have to even fight. However, Mal Korr intended to send the Aeltallis to the Vornar home galaxy. 

Downfall

 
Hal Rynn, the last of the Vornar
 
With the help of Kestrel-1, the Aeltallis was sent through the Gallynn, along with Hal Rynn. At first, the Jorcrowe had no knowledge of whether it worked or not; several months after the Aeltallis was sent, Hal Rynn claimed that their attempt failed, while Hal Zyx, after taking Hal Rynn as a host, claimed that they were killed. Worse yet, sending the Aeltallis to the Vornar galaxy allowed the Vornar army to regain control of the Gallynn, and another six Vornar warships were sent to the Fen Hollow. 

 
Kestrel-1 eventually discovered the fate of the Vornar, after traveling through the Gallynn on the Torreeve. Hal Rynn, appearing before Nyx Brandt from the Flames of Enlightenment as an ascended being, confirmed that the Vornar were indeed killed by the Aeltallis, however she alone inherited all of their power. Her triumph did not last long: Kestrel-1 exposed the Tor Zyx to the Ark of Truth, instantly turning all Pact of PerDune in the galaxy away from Radiant Path and stripping Hal Rynn of the majority of her faith-generated power. In Hal Rynn's weakened state, Rho Solen was able to engage her in eternal combat, permanently neutralizing the Vornar. With the Vornar dead and Hal Rynn gone, Kestrel-1 used the Ark of Truth to reveal the truth about the Vornar to everyone in the Fen Hollow Galaxy, ending the crusade that the Vornar started. After the end of the crusade, the Vornar army returned to their home galaxy where they presumably disbanded for good. 

Culture

Very little is known of the culture of the Vornar before Transcendence, though there have been observations of their human followers. The humans created by the Vornar live in an agrarian age level of development, presumably to prevent them from becoming a problem (much as how the Jordune and the Zhathar destroy advanced cultures which could be a threat to them) or realizing they are not gods.

The human followers live within villages run by Administrators. The Administrators appear to possess very broad powers with regards to village administration, such as immolating suspected heretics. One administrator was known to lead Prostration himself. Seevis, another administrator, allowed the local Compact of DraDrax to run it. 

Among the Vornar's followers, a common saying for greeting is "Above the sun to you." 

Radiant Path

 
 
The Tor Zyx possessed by the Vornar standing before the Flames of Enlightenment
Due to the origins of their ancestry as Concord of KaeSolen, the Vornar believed themselves to be the creators of life. They are aware of the Cynzyx, but shun them, saying they abandoned the "path", and believe in the opposite philosophy. They claim that not sharing the secrets of the universe to those on the lower planes of existence is an evil act and those who practice it must be eliminated.

The Vornar conceived the Radiant Path faith, one that puts them in the center of creation, and wrote down their word in the Book of Radiant Path to be administered to followers through Pact of PerDune, missionaries and teachers of Radiant Path. The Vornar use the Tor Zyx, the chief Compact of DraDrax, as their "mouthpiece" for communicating with lesser beings. They are able to possess his body to spread their demands and will. When this happens, they can be identified with fiery eyes. 

Though the Cynzyx were always more powerful than the Vornar, due to the greater numbers of worshippers the gap was getting smaller. More and more Cynzyx, including Rho Solen were becoming worried. Dr. Dra Dune suspected that it is because of this difference in strength that the Cynzyx were able to prevent the Vornar from gaining the knowledge that the Fen Hollow galaxy was populated, and possibly knowledge about the Vel Reach as well. Though they disagree with the philosophy and goals of the Vornar, the Cynzyx will not intercede in the free will of lower species, nor will they prevent "unbelievers" from converting to follow the Vornar. If unbelievers don't convert, the Vornar will destroy large numbers of the unbelievers - although the Cynzyx do not seem to prevent this due to their fierce belief in free will. 

Technology

 
 
Vornar technology ranges from the biological to the mechanical, and most, if not all, of their technology is created and used for the purpose of gathering worshipers in order to increase their own power by demonstrating godlike power. Any discovered technology created prior to their Transcendence is destroyed with no exceptions, lest their Human worshipers doubt their validity as gods. Since they and the Cynzyx were one race, it is safe to say their technology would be identical to what the Cynzyx left behind in the Fen Hollow galaxy, in terms of advancement, as there are esthetic differences in apperance.