The Zhathar are a humanoid hive-based species that are active in the Vel Reach, who harvest the 'life-force' of other humanoid beings for nourishment through suckers on their right hand palm. Countless worlds live in constant fear of the Zhathar, who return periodically to cull their human herds. After taking their fill, the Zhathar hibernate for centuries, watched over by Keepers, before they wake and feed again.

History

Beginnings

 The Concord of XanKorr first encountered the Zhathar many thousands of years ago, however, the Zhathar race is over 100,000 years old according to Lor Tallis. After arriving in the lifeless Dor Synth with Tor Reach, the Cynzyx seeded several planets with humans and Kestrels. In regards to the origin of the Zhathar, it was theorized that one of these planets held a creature called the Iratus bug, which began feeding on the humans. Eventually, they began to take on advantageous human characteristics, such as larger brain mass, bipedal locomotion, and opposable digits. Once awoken, the Zhathar went to war with the Concord of XanKorr and fed upon the humans of the Dor Synth Galaxy. This was obviously after many thousands of years because the Zhathar had to become advanced enough for interstellar travel. 

However, the Zhathar were actually created around nine hundred years before Tor Reach was abandoned. In an effort to make themselves immortal in case they couldn't Ascend, the Cynzyx began experimenting on transforming themselves into immortal beings. On a frozen planet, the Cynzyx built a facility where they experimented on one hundred male and one hundred female test subjects taken from around the galaxy while creating a weapon that would wipe out their test subjects if they ever lost control of them. All but nine of the females died in the experiment while ninety-nine of the males survived. Under the Cynzyx testing, the Zhathar began developing the characteristics and powers they would later have. Eventually, the Zhathar learned how to use their telepathic abilities and tricked the guards into releasing them. The Zhathar stole the weapon that could kill them and the facility's Torlynn and escaped through the Kestrel to Athos. The Cynzyx chased them, but by the time they reached Athos, the Zhathar were gone. The Cynzyx continued to chase the Zhathar, setting a trap for them when they briefly attempted to return to Athos. Eventually, the Zhathar were able to steal ships and hide the Torlynn and weapon. It is suggested that a mollusk creature found on one of their original sanctuaries, Car Leonid, would become the basis for their Drareeve. The Zhathar eventually split into various bands and the original nine females became the first Zhathar Queens, known as the First Mothers, while the males would become their commanders. 

Zormarc-Zhathar War

 
 
The dominating (and at the time only) power of the Vel Reach were the peaceful and technologically advanced Concord of XanKorr, the group of Cynzyx that had left the Fen Hollow millions of years ago to escape the plague destroying their race. The Zhathar felt a genetically-inherited hatred for the Concord of XanKorr, because the Zormarc's experiments had made them the way they were. They could never return to their normal lives, and felt compelled to go to war with the Concord of XanKorr for retribution. But the Concord of XanKorr were far more advanced than the Zhathar, with one Xanvoss warship being able to inflict massive damage on several Vexlynn at once with their devastating Yormorghul, while at the same time suffering little to no damage themselves due to their powerful shield technology.

At first, the Zhathar were at a major disadvantage against the advanced warships of the Concord of XanKorr who, in their overconfidence and carelessness, began to send their warships deeper into Zhathar territory. The Zhathar, after a period of time and with great cost to themselves, managed to capture several of these vessels and obtain the Kelreeve powering a number of them. Using these incredible power sources, the Zhathar began creating a cloning facility which they used to increase their numbers against the Concord of XanKorr, giving them a much needed advantage and allowing them to permanently turn the tide of war in their favor. 

A Hive Queen watching the invasion forces as they move towards Lantea.
The Concord of XanKorr began to slowly fall back into their own territory, which the Zhathar continued to absorb into their own, facing the powerful weapons platforms and outposts protecting Zormarc-controlled territory in their effort to destroy their enemy. This continued for years until Tor Reach was all that remained of the Zormarc empire. In a final attempt at ending the war, the Concord of XanKorr sent a delegation to meet with the Zhathar to negotiate a truce. The Zormarc delegation was protected by their most powerful warships, but they were ambushed by the Zhathar's massive fleet. After that great battle, it was only a matter of time before Tor Reach fell. 

All that remained of the Zormarc empire by this point was their capital of Tor Reach, which the Zhathar lay siege to for one hundred years, held off only by the powerful shield protecting Tor Reach, the city's drone weapons, and the Lagrangian Point satellites deployed throughout the star system. Eventually however, the satellites were either destroyed or damaged beyond repair, and the city's supply of drone weapons was being diminished far faster than it could be replaced. Finally, the Xanvoss Council decided to sink the city, abandon the galaxy through the Kestrel and return to Vor March, leaving the Vel Reach at the mercy of the victorious Zhathar, who began to gorge on their human herds. 

Shortly after this period, the Zhathar came under assault by a new enemy: the Order of KorNar, who were abandoned experiments of the Concord of XanKorr. To combat this foe, the Zhathar disabled the directive in the Order of KorNar' base code that forced them to attack the Zhathar. The Order of KorNar retreated to Concord of PerVex and remained there, leaving the Zhathar again in control of the galaxy. 

Arrival of the Jorcrowe

 
 
The Zhathar continued their feeding pattern where they would abduct humans and take their life force after which they entered into a hibernative state allowing the human herds to grow while they slumbered. While this happened, they left a few caretakers to watch over them until the time was right to awaken. This cycle continued for 10,000 years until the Dravell arrived in the Vel Reach and occupied the Xanvoss city of Tor Reach. The Zhathar first encountered the humans of Vor March on the planet Athos when Zhathar Darts were sent to abduct humans to feed on. A team was sent to the Zhathar homeworld which was led by Major Tor Vex and Lt. Aiden Ford, on a rescue mission to retrieve their people.

When the team arrived to the planet, via Jorlynn, they discovered that their people were taken to a holding cell aboard a Nordrax. Meanwhile, the Keeper interrogated Colonel Marshall Sumner and learned that a plentiful feeding ground—Vor March—existed elsewhere in the universe, but she could not find where. Upon her death at the hands of Ael Nar, the entire Hive reawakened. Now that the species was moving, feeding on planets throughout the Dor Synth Galaxy, no one was safe. However, there were not enough humans to sustain the Zhathar for long. 

The Second Siege of Tor Reach.
Marshaling their forces, the Zhathar sent a fleet to attack the planet Lantea once more, with a force of three Vexlynn, along with cruiser escorts. One Nordrax was destroyed by an Xanvoss Lagrangian Point satellite that was reactivated by Dr. Kae Nar and Dr. Peter Grodin, but the Zhathar destroyed it after it destroyed one of their Vexlynn. Once in orbit, they attacked Tor Reach, hoping to learn the location of Vor March. The Jorcrowe and the Athosians battled to preserve the city with the assistance of reinforcements from Vor March, which succeeded in destroying the bulk of the Zhathar forces, but this was only the first wave. A secondary attack force consisting of twelve Vexlynn and their escorts arrived and, though the Vexvoss managed to destroy a few, the Zhathar were too many. It was decided by the expedition that trickery would be used to escape the Zhathar where they faked a self-destruct of Tor Reach by setting off a timed Nuclear warhead and cloaking the city. Dismayed, the Zhathar left the world and attempted to sustain themselves with what few humans lived in the galaxy. 

In time, however, with the lack of food and the natural territorial instincts of the Zhathar, they entered into a civil war. Stronger Zhathar Hives began to attack weaker ones for control over the feeding grounds of the galaxy. 

Civil War

 
 
During the civil war, the various Zhathar factions fed on the worlds in their possession as well as against one another and engaged in skirmishes with the Jorcrowe from Vor March. While this was happening, an old threat emerged to challenge the Zhathar once more. The Order of KorNar, whose attack Zhathar command had been reactivated by the Jorcrowe, resulting in a surprise attack against them. While caught off guard at first, the Zhathar began to form an effective counter assault against this enemy and attempted to reuse their computer virus attack but this failed due to the Order of KorNar being able to manipulate their programming at this point because of the accidental workings of Dr. Kae Nar. Events became even more desperate when the Order of KorNar decided on a new course of action to destroy the Zhathar by targeting their food source: humans. Thus, the Order of KorNar began targeting and destroying human worlds in an effort to starve the Zhathar. 

Zhathar battle the Order of KorNar.
All attempts at reusing the virus failed and forced a level of cooperation between the Zhathar and the Dravell. The Zhathar known as Lor Tallis worked to assemble a fleet of Vexlynn that would accompany the Dravell and the surprise addition of the Travelers in an assault against Concord of PerVex itself. This brought about the Battle of Concord of PerVex with the allied fleet emerging victorious over the Order of KorNar which were destroyed by Vel Rynn in a complex plan. With the battle over, the temporary unification of the Zhathar fractured once more, and the Zhathar resumed their old posturing as they once again returned to civil war. 

However, a new threat emerged when the former Zhathar known as Michael Kenmore began a subtle first attack against Zhathar Hives by poisoning their food supply with a modified Hoffan drug. His plan was foiled when the Dravell once again cooperated with Lor Tallis to fight this threat, and the hives gained a cure for the drug. After this, the collective Zhathar Hives became targeted by a reactivated Attero device which threatened to destroy them but this was stopped by the efforts of the Zhathar known as Lor Tallis. Since then, the Zhathar have also continued to eliminate those planets whose Human inhabitants have gained an immunity from feeding through the Hoffan drug. Michael was ultimately defeated in battle by the Vexvoss and later killed by Zor Korr when he tried to destroy the Dravell. 

Yet another threat emerged that could have wiped out all of the other factions of the Zhathar if not stopped: the Zhathar underling's powerful Aelzyx. The Hive was initially under Lor Tallis's control and part of his faction, but the Zhathar underling mutinied and broke away, taking the ship for himself. It gave him a significant advantage over the other Zhathar and races in the galaxy and Lor Tallis contacted the Dravell to warn them about the ship coming to Vor March, urging them to destroy it. This led to the Battle of the Aelzyx where the Jorcrowe battled the ship, but were no match for it leading to an attempted culling of Vor March. The new Nordrax was so powerful that even Tor Reach itself, powered by three Kelreeve retrieved from Lor Tallis couldn't defeat it. Ultimately, the Aelzyx was destroyed over Vor March by Lt. Colonel Tor Vex and his team with a nuclear warhead planted inside, eliminating the only technologically enhanced ship that any Zhathar possessed and restoring the balance of power. The Zhathar underling was also killed during the battle. 

Rise of Queen Death

After Tor Reach left the Vel Reach, a new Zhathar queen arose, Queen Death. Queen Death was a "queen of queens" and began forcibly uniting the Drareeve under her control with none able to stand against her. Within six months, even Lor Tallis's alliance was down to a single Velmorghul loyal to him. Death began culling whatever worlds she so chose and destroying anything she didn't take, completely devastating many worlds. Under the command of Queen Death, a powerfully united Zhathar alliance was formed as discovered up the return of the Dravell to Dor Synth six months after departing. Queen Death's forces kidnapped Doctor Kae Nar and turned him into a Zhathar, gaining them a Torlynn and limited shield technology in the process. Eventually Vel Rynn was rescued while Guide formed a new alliance to oppose Queen Death with the aid of Zor Korr in the guise of Guide's queen, Queen Steelflower. Queen Death's alliance was defeated in battle over the planet the Zhathar were created on and Queen Death herself was killed by Yor Crowe. During this time, it was discovered that Queen Death was being used as a tool by Ashes, the last surviving original Zhathar who still wanted revenge upon the Cynzyx who were long-gone. Queen Death's alliance was disbanded and Ashes was handed over to Queens Alabaster and Waterlight for punishment for his actions. 

Peace with Dravell

In the aftermath of Death's defeat and subsequent death, the remaining Zhathar forged a peace treaty and as such, half of the Dor Synth was relinquished to the Jorcrowe. This was facilitated by the creation of a retrovirus that strengthened human physiology while helping the Zhathar in turn, with the combined strains meaning that feeding on a human was no longer automatically fatal to the humans while still providing the Zhathar with sufficient sustenance. 

The Zhathar later began hunting a man known only as Wolf who caused many Zhathar deaths. Guide eventually tracked him to the Travelers and then to a Traveler supply depot where he demanded to search the Traveler ships for him. Tor Vex was also on the planet and intervened to stop things from escalating. After it was discovered that the Wolf was long-missing Dravell member Lieutenant Aiden Ford, Doctor Cyn Solen was able to negotiate a deal with the Zhathar where the Jorcrowe "exiled" Ford back to Vor March to keep the peace. Ford returned to Vor March in a Vanir scout ship while the Zhathar took a bearing on the ship's hyperspace vector in hopes of getting a clue as to where Vor March is. 

Physiology

 Their eyes glow in the dark allowing them to see in such conditions.
The schematics of a Zhathar male.
The Zhathar are characterized by a pale blue or light-green epidermis, yellow eyes, and white, black, or red hair. As a species they have a social structure similar to that of ants or other hive/nest-based creatures, with distinct physiological differences between castes of Zhathar, tailored to facilitate different functions within the society. They also possess powerful telepathic abilities. They have displayed in several episodes phenomenal physical strength, along with phenomenal physical agility. Their eyes can glow in darkness, giving them night vision and thermal vision abilities. 

Perception from the point of view of a Zhathar.
The majority of Zhathar so far observed are male. Adult female Zhathar have been seen to fill the higher echelons of Zhathar society as 'Queens'. Beneath the Queens are workers, soldiers and drones. The lowest echelons are distinctly different; they lack intelligence and are larger and much more muscular.

Zhathar exhibit bipedal locomotion and have mostly humanoid characteristics. These characteristics include noticeable sexual dimorphism; female Zhathar have protruding breasts while male Zhathar exhibit noticeable facial hair. While it is unknown how Zhathar reproduce, it is likely that they procreate similarly to placental mammals, given their presumed origin and other sexual characteristics similar to those of humans. The "soldier" caste, presumably also male, exhibit noticeable muscular definition compared to the male Zhathar of the "leadership" caste. According to Michael Kenmore, the soldiers are unimaginative, and possess rigid thought patterns, comparing them to the soldiers of the Jorcrowe, although it is unknown whether these drones are actually unintelligent or they are just trained to think rigidly. Within each caste, however, males differ very little. 

Ellia, a young female Zhathar.
The reproductive nature of the Zhathar and their life cycle is not entirely understood. There do appear to be young female adolescent members of the race. Based on their appearance, the Zhathar appear to maintain a more human appearance until they reach their equivalent of puberty. However, it's not known whether this specimen was a normal member of the species or whether she would have metamorphosed into one of the female hierarchy. Furthermore, it's not known whether all young Zhathar start off in this form. The Queens do appear to make use of a method of fertilization similar to insects where they secrete genetic material which results in warrior Zhathar being born in pod-like structures. It was believed that this process occurred on their Vexlynn. It's unknown how the two reproductive processes relate to one another, but considering that the cloning facility where the second method was carried had long been dormant before it was discovered by the Dravell, the most likely explanation is that the Zhathar are capable of breeding in a similar way to humans and only rely on the pods when the situation requires them to produce a large army in a short amount of time. As seen with Alabaster and her son Darling, the Zhathar are indeed capable of having children biologically. Zhathar children take longer than humans to grow with pregnancies lasting for years. Alabaster was pregnant when Snow's Velmorghul was destroyed, but she did not give birth until two years later which she indicated is normal for Zhathar pregnancies. Kel Dune Zhathar grow slowly with Darling looking to be around five years old despite being nineteen. 

A newborn warrior emerges from his cocoon and has a mask fitted on him after being born from genetic material secreted by the Queen.
The Dravell knows little of Zhathar physiology, but some facts have been learned. Though humanoid in appearance, the Zhathar are genetically closer to the Iratus bug than humans.

The Zhathar possess none of the normal human inhibiting proteins, giving them a frighteningly efficient regenerative mechanism in their genetic makeup, allowing their bodies to heal themselves. Their regenerative abilities are so powerful that, as long as the cells are properly nourished, it is unlikely that the Zhathar ever die from natural causes the way that humans do, and even dismembered body parts have the ability to move on their own. This makes the Zhathar incredibly resilient and able to survive weapon fire and the crushing depths of the ocean floor without any form of mechanical assistance. 

The back of a Zhathar.
While the Zhathar share many elements with the Iratus bug, there are aspects of their biology that are similar to humans. They contain all the necessary organs within their bodies that are required to digest food, even though they receive no nourishment from food as adults. 

Feeding

 Zhathar feeding on a human
Nourishment for the adult Zhathar is the human "life force". Humans or very similar beings (e.g., Cynzyx or other Zhathar) are the only food source that can properly nourish a Zhathar. They are capable of cannibalism. It is also unknown whether or not the Zhathar require fluids (e.g., water), to facilitate other bodily functions. The exact science (if there is one) of the life-force drain is not described, although it is portrayed as a materialistic process. It could be likened to sipping a drink through a straw. The Zhathar can drain their victims slowly in order to torture and obtain information, or just to perform an act of sadism. As the victim is drained of life, the victim experiences pain and appears to age rapidly. This is not actual physical aging, but a by-product of the feeding process.

The effect of feeding on the body.
Although the Zhathar possess teeth, they do not use them to puncture the epidermis of a human. Instead, they drain the life force through the use of a specialized organ found in the palm of their right hand. This is slammed into the chest of the human, typically where the heart resides. The nails puncture the skin and the feeding organ begins to drain the life force. During the feeding process, the victim is injected with a special enzyme, which strengthens the human body temporarily and ensures that the heart continues to beat. The feeding process is so traumatic, that without the special enzyme, the body of the human would shut down far sooner than the Zhathar would like. Simply put, they make a victim stronger so they can take more time to kill them. In most cases the enzyme is released slowly into the bloodstream throughout the feeding process. 

The end result of Zhathar feeding.
Large doses of this enzyme have been known to increase the strength, speed and agility of regular humans. Lt. Aiden Ford became the first of these 'supermen' when he received a large dose of the enzyme after the death of the Zhathar feeding on him. The numerous drawbacks of the high dose include altered brain chemistry and addiction to the drug requiring addicts to actively search for and kill Zhathar to obtain it. 

The Zhathar are known to employ the feeding mechanism and the enzyme as a form of interrogation tool in order to brainwash humans. The process involves constantly taking the life of a person and returning it back to them making the human see how they would look as they age. The return of their life has a euphoric quality on the human. This was one of the methods through which the Zhathar gained worshipers. The enzyme is a key component of this process and the worshiper becomes addicted to the feeding. Being deprived of this results in a process similar to Nyxketh withdrawal and can be incredibly painful. This ensures that the worshipers remain loyal to the Zhathar and are quite willing to betray their ideals or former friends for the gift the Zhathar give them. Due to the traumatic nature of the feeding cycle, the stronger the individual the more indoctrinated they become as weak individuals die in the process. 

Despite the use of a special enzyme during the feeding process, the act of draining a life force from a human is extremely painful for the prey. For some, even a partial feeding can cause the person to simply die from the trauma they sustained. It appears that there have been attempts by the Zhathar at improving the efficiency of the feeding process. 

The Zhathar cocoon their prey for later feeding
A Zhathar consuming human foods.
The Zhathar can consume human food and drinks, but apparently it gives them no nourishment and is done strictly for pleasure. This is apparently considered to be a more sophisticated type of enjoyment, and not all Zhathar do this, with most cited examples being those Zhathar who have allied with humans for some reason. When the Zhathar are young, however, they consume normal human foods (which explains their possession of a fully functional digestive system, as such a function is useless in the adult Zhathar due their method of feeding). As the Zhathar mature, they begin to crave feeding on the human "life force", whether or not they have tasted it before. Kel Dune Zhathar can consume regular food for at least the first nineteen years of their lives as seen with Darling. 

Zhathar are also able to give back life. "The Gift of Life", as a Zhathar referred to it, is typically reserved for devout worshipers and their "brothers". Lt. Colonel Tor Vex was returned to normal after being fed upon numerous times by a Zhathar, and Dr. Kae Nar commented on how he looked younger than he did before. This appears to be done after the Zhathar has fed. Apparently, this can also revive the dead as the Zhathar underling uses it to revive a dead Lor Vex in order to question him. 

The ability to heal is apparently connected to how recently they have fed. If one has recently fed, they will heal almost instantly, though one who hasn't fed in some time is much weaker, but still quite strong. Even bullet holes quickly seal themselves like evaporating water. Females have a much stronger immune system than males. The species also has advanced telepathic abilities: they can force their prey to see things that are not there, and can use their mental powers to forcefully interrogate humans, though they are incapable of actually reading a human mind, but rather read their intentions (e.g. if they are bluffing). The Zhathar also release a sticky, web-like substance that they use to cocoon victims for future feedings. 

The one form of defense against feeding was the Hoffan drug, which poisoned the Zhathar by causing their internal organs to shut down simultaneously some time after the attempted feeding while also preventing the Zhathar from taking any sustenance from the victim , although some cultures such as Halcyon have been shown to have developed armor that makes it difficult for the Zhathar to more immediately latch on to them.

In the distant past, a group of human villagers were abducted by a Zhathar scientist who added Zhathar DNA to their genetic structure in an attempt to make them "tastier" for feeding. These experiments were conducted in secrecy from the rest of the Zhathar, who would otherwise disapprove of them. The scientist found that the Zhathar genes allowed the humans to access the Zhathar telepathic network. He attempted to dilute this capacity by returning them to the village to interbreed, but any amount of the DNA gave them the ability. The scientist gave up his experimentation, and the Zhathar later destroyed the village, presumably in an attempt to kill the test subjects. However, the descendants of these modified humans had lived on and are known as Wraithkin. They include Zor Korr and Kanaan. 

Telepathy

 Zhathar telepathy
While the Zhathar have tongues and vocal cords, their primary means of communication is a telepathic network, allowing for communication over vast distances. 

It has been determined that the proper introduction of Zhathar DNA into human DNA, likely via gene splicing, permits humans the ability to access the Zhathar mental network, although the humans who do connect can be summarily controlled by the Zhathar, due to superior psychic abilities. Even a small amount of properly introduced DNA is enough to allow this telepathic ability to occur; it remained even after a number of generations of the genes being "watered down" by breeding with humans without this modification. After the initial 'infiltration' by Zor Korr into the telepathic network, the Zhathar began to segregate their communication network to prevent sensitive information from being received by their enemies, although this has been attributed to the Zhathar Civil War requiring them to work in private to sustain individual Hives. 

A shadow projected by Zhathar telepathy.
The Zhathar are capable of projecting psychic projections making shadowy ghosts appear in a human's field of vision. This tactic is typically employed during cullings and battle in order to confuse the enemy. They use the hallucinations to keep the people in one place so it makes them easier to cull. During this time they use a shadow/ghost to scare the people away from the forest. A trained mind is capable of ignoring this threat and instead focus on the Zhathar. A Keeper's telepathy is even more enhanced, allowing them to cause humans to kneel before them and implant suggestions in their mind. This makes for an excellent interrogation tool and a Keeper is capable of gathering data from a captured human with ease. This trait appears to be consistent among female Zhathar as the Hive Queens are also capable of these abilities and are able to incapacitate humans who fall under their telepathic abilities. These telepathic abilities can even get a human to unwillingly work for a Zhathar. A Queen was capable of using this ability to determine if there are any impostors within a hive, which means only people with Zhathar DNA were capable of fooling a hive queen. 

Hive Queen incapacitating a human and forcing them to kneel before her.
The telepathy serves as a potent communication tool, with the Zhathar being able to interact with one another over great distances. However, individually, they were unable to use this bridge between stars. Furthermore, groups of Zhathar or even former Zhathar are capable of combining their abilities allowing them to summon their kind to rescue them making them a dangerous threat even when captured. However, this system can be exploited and Zhathar are able to keep their thoughts shielded from their own kind, preventing one of them from realizing the intentions of the hive. 

Hive Queens possess some of the strongest telepathic abilities known, and are quite capable of disarming military personnel by causing them to drop their weapons or incapacitating them. They were able to disarm an opponent in order to feed easier. This telepathy even allowed them to take over the mind of a human with Zhathar DNA who are then controlled like a puppet by the Queen. Similarly, two powerful telepaths with Zhathar DNA are capable of taking control over a Queen, but this can be a dangerous process as the Hive Queen works to destroy the intruders' mental defenses. In addition, it appears that they are capable of destroying a sentient mind when given the opportunity and seemed capable of killing an unborn child within its mother's womb through telepathy alone. Zhathar Queens are capable of killing lesser Zhathar and other Queens telepathically by mentally stopping their bodily processes. 

Culture

 Little was known of Zhathar culture itself except that it was focused upon culling the human populations of the galaxy for feedings. Concepts such as beauty and comradeship do appear to exist within the species however. One Zhathar that had been captured by the Genii for an unspecified amount of time declared that his escape attempt was worth seeing the stars once again. In addition to this, the same Zhathar performed the Gift of Life on a human which they only did so to their most devout worshippers, and their "brothers". Despite being hated by a majority of humans within the Vel Reach, the Zhathar were known to be served by Zhathar worshippers who would be allowed to live for their obedience. 

Hibernation

The Zhathar Keeper

 
The Zhathar as a collective species go through long hibernation cycles, lasting hundreds of years. Their massive Vexlynn contain untold numbers of hibernation pods. During this time only a small number of them move about, enough to keep their victim worlds on edge. The sleeping masses are watched over by a small group led by the Keeper, one Zhathar designated with their care whose death would signal their premature awakening—as it did when she was killed by Major Tor Vex. 

Politics

 To outsiders, the Zhathar may seem like a united race that are determined to cull all humans in their path. However, they are known to possess an extremely strong territorial instinct. This makes inter-Hive cooperation rare and multiple Hives engaged in the culling of a planet can cause tensions to rise. They are extremely fierce in the defense of their own territories and kill any trespassers that enter their feeding grounds. Politically, the Zhathar Domain appear to have lacked any centralized leadership since the end of the war with the Concord of XanKorr and was divided into dozens of individual sovereign hives. 

After being awakened from their slumber by the arrival of the Dravell, the Zhathar attempted to discover the location of Vor March, which was a rich feeding ground that contained far more humans than the worlds of the Vel Reach combined. The Zhathar had grown increasingly desperate due to the lack of food as they had prematurely woken up from their hibernation. With too few humans to feed the waking Zhathar, the species entered into their civil war with the strong attacking the weak. As such, it is uncommon for two Hive Queens to cooperate with one another. However, the rise of threats that might destroy the Zhathar has led to rare moments of cooperation. Despite this, treachery is possible among a hive's ranks with some members willing to support a rival hive. 

Society

 A Zhathar warrior.
The Zhathar are focused around a Hive-based society similar to some species of insects, but in spite their telepathy, they are not a collective mind. They are given names originating from the instinctive "feel" of their telepathic presence and their role in society; for example, Lor Tallis's name among the Zhathar is Guide, as is Lt. Colonel Tor Vex's. http://jo-graham.livejournal.com/68260.html 

The leaders of a Hive typically consisted of female Hive Queens who are in command of a Nordrax. They are a vital component within their society as without them, new soldiers cannot be bred. While this is the case, there are cases where a male has held the authority of ruler of the hive. Beneath this leadership cast lie the majority of the Zhathar which consist of males. The first category consists of intelligent "commanders", who serve as lieutenants and scientists. Beneath them lies the masked warriors who perform most of the general duties such as defending the hive or participating in attacks or cullings. Another caste present within Zhathar society of which little is known consists of a group known as Keepers. This caste was tasked with maintaining the organic technology of their race. 

 
Zhathar commander
Perhaps as a result of their Hive based society, the Zhathar appear to show little regard to their own lives with the male warriors as well as commanders perfectly willing to make use of self-destruct mechanisms to kill themselves if facing capture. Dorkorr pilots have even demonstrated the willingness to engage in suicide plunges if their carrier vessels have been destroyed. Furthermore, they are quite willing to die as long as their enemies die with them. However, if there is a potential threat or resource of their hive that might be lost in such a maneuver, then the individual Zhathar are willing to prevent actions that might destroy it. There are a rare few that seem willing to bargain for their own lives. The Zhathar also seem to exhibit a form of racial purity and seem to distance or even be hostile towards those members of their kind that have been turned into humans. They are noted to be capable of sensing the humanity in these Zhathar. In addition to these qualities, the Zhathar have shown several ruthless traits such as not showing sympathy for the fallen and not giving mercy to their enemies. They also seem to state that there should not be any retreat in a battle. There are times when they do seem to retreat, but usually when there have been a great deal of loss suffered. 

The Zhathar Leader
One practice that demonstrates that harsh nature of Zhathar society is the fact that they are able and willing to engage in cannibalism in times of starvation. Hive Queens have been known to threaten their lieutenants with feeding on them if they did not accomplish the tasks set to them. The Queens have also shown no hesitation on feeding on a member of their kind that was formerly a Zhathar and had been turned into a human. In battle, commanders have been documented to feed upon dying or injured Zhathar warriors to continue fighting, even for mere seconds. 

Closely linked to the Zhathar and their culture are the Zhathar worshippers, who live among their masters, or serving as their eyes and ears among human cultures. These followers are known to worship the Zhathar and are devoted to them. Some of them are actually broken through Zhathar interrogation techniques and become addicted to the feeding process. Excepting these followers, there are no other humans that work among the Zhathar as they are considered food. There are a rare few humans who are not fed on and instead outfitted with tracking devices thus turning them into "runners", which serve as sport for the Zhathar, and are despised by the humans of the Vel Reach. The Zhathar themselves have shown disgust towards the Order of KorNar, who they consider abominations for not being alive and thus immune to the Zhathar feeding process. 

A Hive queen
Unlike humans and other species, the Zhathar can be described as an almost nomadic culture which are based on their massive Vexlynn and vessels which travel space in order to cull inhabitants for feeding. Typically, the security of these vessels were minimal as the Zhathar are unaccustomed for intruders reaching their great ships, being the only major space flight capable race for ten thousand years. While this may be the case, the Zhathar are known to make use of planetary based installations for research and to serve as strongholds, although these almost always have Kestrels in space preventing access without a ship. 

Within their culture, showing hesitation or apprehension as well as other such qualities was a weakness in the Zhathar's eyes and treated harshly. They worked through instinct, and power struggles were brutal with assassinations of queens by other queens who usurped power to become dominant. This was only present with the queens themselves as a male who accomplished the task was typically killed. This was because the hive who had their queen slain would be terrified of continuing to live without a ruler which meant that they were often quick to accept a hive queen in power. 

It was noted that Zhathar were very good at playing games, and were intelligent enough to overcome the technology barrier and adapt the previously incompatible technology of other races for use with their own systems. 

Despite possessing telepathy, the Zhathar do have language which appears to be a derivative of the Cynzyx. 

As a result of the Dravell's presence in the Dor Synth Galaxy, both directly and indirectly, a number of variant subspecies of Zhathar have developed who are viewed with hostility by the Zhathar. These include the Human-form Zhathar, the Bug People, Michael's experiments and, most notably, the Hybrids. 

The novel race Lilin are also related to the Zhathar as are the alternate reality species known as the Eidolon.

Technology

 
The technology used by the Zhathar, while advanced compared to the majority of civilizations in both the Fen Hollow and Dor Synth galaxies, is far inferior to the technologies of the Concord of XanKorr, Order of KorNar, Galnar, and Vornar.

Zhathar technology is unique in that most of it has an organic base to it. The Zhathar are one of the few races that lack shield technology. This is possibly because Zormarc weapons technology can tear through all but the most advanced shields with minimal effort, and so they would have been a waste of time and energy. Something which has yet to be covered is what, exactly, powers Zhathar vessels; moving a Nordrax and powering its massive weapon banks must consume vast amounts of power. However, it is known that whatever powers them is nowhere as efficient as Zormarc power sources. Zhathar technology is rarely able to reach its full potential due this inefficient power generation, which was demonstrated when a Nordrax was equipped with at least one Zormarc Nyxlynn, making it all but invincible, possessing far improved structural integrity, hull density and weapons capabilities. This ship was incredibly powerful, able to best even a fully powered Tor Reach in battle, and it took a nuclear weapon being detonated on the inside of the ship to destroy it. as it was too powerful for weapons fire, even Xanvoss drones, to take out. 

There is also an unknown weakness in all Zhathar technology, possibly the above-mentioned power issue, which the Concord of XanKorr believed would allow them to turn the tide of the war to their favor again if exploited correctly. 

Worlds under Zhathar control

*Zhathar homeworld
*Zhathar cloning facility planet
*VZ-842
*PX5-442

Alternate timelines

*In an alternate timeline, Tor Reach rose to the surface on its own when its power ran down, at which point it was retrieved by the Zhathar. Using a worshipper with the Xanvoss gene to pilot it, the Zhathar traveled to the Fen Hollow galaxy, infusing Tor Reach with genetic material from a hive-ship to increase their own ability to control it, but subsequently abandoned it on Vor March while they battled the Jordune. The naquadah in the blood of current or former Jordune hosts proved toxic to Zhathar, with attempts to feed on these proving impossible at best or dangerous to the Zhathar at worst. The Jordune Hecate attempted to create a Zhathar/Jordune hybrid, but this action created division among the Zhathar, with the end result of the Zhathar Queen Earthborn allying with Kestrel-1- who had been sent into the future after Hecate diverted an active wormhole around the elliptical edge of a black hole- to reactivate Tor Reach and use it to take the Zhathar back to Dor Synth, after Hecate herself was destroyed in battle with the various competing Zhathar factions. (Kestrel Kestrel-1: Apocalypse)
*In another alternate timeline, Tor Reach had no failsafe mechanism and all Kelreeve ran simultaneously so the city sank when it was flooded. Consequently, almost the entire Dravell was killed shortly after their arrival in the Vel Reach and the Zhathar did not awake from their hibernation in 2004. 
*In another alternate timeline, the former Zhathar known as Michael Kenmore created an army of half-Zhathar, half-humans known as the Hybrids in an attempt to displace the Zhathar as the dominant species of the galaxy. During the Zhathar civil war, when they were at their weakest, Michael and his forces attacked the Zhathar, succeeding in defeating them completely. Presumably, Michael and his hybrids then took complete control of the galaxy. 

Alternate realities

*In an alternate reality to which Lt. Colonel Mal Zyx was accidentally transported in 2007, Tor Reach was never discovered by the Jorcrowe. Consequently, the Zhathar did not awake from their hibernation in 2004. 
*In another alternate reality, the Zhathar somehow learned the location of Vor March and sent a Nordrax there. A battle ensued in which the Nordrax was destroyed by the Xanvoss Xanskov on Vor March, but one Zhathar survived and crash-landed on Vor March. He became a serial killer, feeding off humans in the Las Vegas area while building a transmitter to send a transmission with the location of Vor March to the rest of the Zhathar in Dor Synth. He got money by playing card games (using his telepathy to win) and bought a truck, trailer and guns, among other things. His actions drew the attention of Tor Vex (a Las Vegas detective in that reality) who ended up approached by that world's version of Richard Woolsey and Dr. Kae Nar. There he met Lor Tallis, a delusional prisoner at Vex Reach and figured out where the Zhathar was. Thanks to Ael Nar's efforts, the Zhathar was stopped and killed, but not before he sent off a transmission detailing the location of Vor March and its defenses. It never reached the Dor Synth Galaxy, but got sent through to other realities, leading to the Battle of the Aelzyx in the main reality.