Janet Fraiser was Chief Medical Officer of the newly formed Stargate Command. Starting as a captain, she was later promoted to major. She served for seven years up until her death in 2003.

Following her death, Fraiser's role as Chief Medical Officer was temporarily taken over by Dr. Brightman before Dr. Carolyn Lam - the daughter of the SGC's newest commanding officer, Major General Henry Landry - took over the position in 2005.

Biography

Background information

Fraiser was once married to a man who discouraged her from joining the United States Air Force. They were no longer together as of 1997 and, apparently, they never had any children. In her seven and a half years at the SGC she became one of the foremost experts on Goa'uld symbiotes, having created a symbiote tank to keep Junior in, and having had opportunities to dissect dead symbiotes. As the Chief Medical Officer of Stargate Command, Dr. Fraiser had the authority to overrule those of any rank whatsoever when it came to medical issue. She used this to get the SGC's main flagship team SG-1, into the infirmary on multiple occasions and ceasing experimental tests on SG team members. Her use of such authority once led SG-1 team leader, Colonel Jack O'Neill to call her a "Napoleonic power monger". 

1997

When Fraiser was first assigned to Stargate Command, she had to deal with the Touched virus to which she, Teal'c, and Dr. Daniel Jackson were immune. After Teal'c managed to secure a blood sample from the Untouched, she realized that she and Daniel were immune because of their use of Antihistamine for allergies. She was then able to synthesize a cure. 

When the real Colonel Jack O'Neill returned from P3X-562, she determined he was indeed the real O'Neill. 

When Colonel Jack O'Neill was infected with nanites on the planet Argos, she discovered the nanites in his blood. While experimenting on the nanites, they almost breached containment and Major General George S. Hammond ordered them destroyed. Fortunately, SG-1 was able to deactivate the nanites in O'Neill and the rest of the Argosians. 

She attempted to remove the Goa'uld symbiote from Teal'c and replace his dependence on it with a drug but was unsuccessful. 

When Dr. Daniel Jackson was presumed dead on the planet Oannes, she believed the rest of SG-1 were suffering from Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and had Major General George S. Hammond remove them from active duty for a week. When they began to question what they remember, she called Dr. James MacKenzie in to perform a psychiatric examination. 

200px
She assisted Captain Samantha Carter in preventing Hathor from gaining control of Stargate Command when all the men on the base were affected by Hathor's mysterious pink mist. She was wounded in the process and received a medal for her actions. 

When SG-1 traveled to Hanka and discovered all the Hankan were wiped out by a virus, she and her team were called in to examine SG-1. She cleared them and they went to tag the bodies in hazmat suits. They found a lone survivor named Cassandra. She examined her and found no trace of the virus in her system and she was taken to Earth. Later, Cassandra fell ill and she discovered a bomb in her chest. She and Dr. William Warner tried to remove it but it temporarily stopped her heart. They attempted to send Cassandra back to Hanka but it was determined the closer she got to the Stargate the worse she became. They took her to an abandoned nuclear facility and since she was no longer in proximity to Gate the bomb broke down in her system. Afterwards, she adopted Cassandra. 

1998

When SG-1 returned from Altair, she performed an exam on Colonel Jack O'Neill and found no heartbeat. She then took his blood and upon seeing that his blood was white, O'Neill used a scalpel to cut into his arm and found he was an Android. 

When SG-1 returned from Nasya, she performed an exam on Captain Samantha Carter. She discovered the abrasion in her throat but was unaware it was an entry mark from Jolinar of Malkshur. She later traveled to the Air Force Academy Hospital to help care for the Nasyans. She discovered that one of the Nasyans had incapacitated Dr. Jacobs and escaped the hospital. It was later learned he was an Ashrak named Edrekh. When he succeeded in killing Jolinar, she attempted to save Carter and was successful. 

When SG-1 returned from the planet Terella and Dr. Daniel Jackson became ill, she determined he was suffering from withdrawal from the Sarcophagus. While he was recovering, he attacked her and escaped. Fortunately, she was unharmed. 

When the Virus Orb opened and one of the spikes pierced Colonel Jack O'Neill's shoulder, she used antibiotics to slow the growth of the A't'trr. Unfortunately, Lt. Graham Simmons was allergic to the antibiotics and became very ill. Luckily, SG-1 was able to convince the A't'trr to go to P4G-881 and he and O'Neill survived. 

When SG-1 returned from Chulak with Drey'auc and Rya'c, she examined Rya'c and confirmed there was not a bomb implanted in his chest. Luckily, Drey'auc noticed that his missing teeth had been replaced and Fraiser was able to remove them. She determined it contained a deadly plague that would have killed everyone on Earth. 

When Teal'c was bitten by an Infestation fly on Svoriin, she realized he was beyond her help and called in an expert. With the assistance of Captain Samantha Carter and herself, Dr. Timothy Harlow was able to counteract the bug's venom, and with the help of Junior, reverse the effects. 

When Stargate Command was dialed into P3W-451, she was called to the Embarkation room to assist the personnel wounded by an overload. On the way she was detained by Colonel Frank Cromwell, who thought there was an alien incursion. She was released when they ran into Colonel Jack O'Neill. 

When Colonel Jack O'Neill had the Ancient Repository of knowledge downloaded into his head, she determined his brain was operating at over 90% of its capacity. Later, she observed him building the Power booster device and attempted to take notes but couldn't keep up. 

1999

When SG-1 captured Apophis, she did her best to keep him alive but without a Sarcophagus his body began to age at a rapid pace. He and his host eventually died and were turned over to Sokar. 

When Dr. Daniel Jackson switched bodies with Ma'chello, she did everything that she could to keep him alive until they were switched back. 

When the Pod people became ill, she traveled to PJ2-445 to assist. She was unable to determine the cause so she brought one of the aliens back to Stargate Command. She performed an MRI that caused the alien great pain. Fortunately, Dr. Daniel Jackson and Captain Samantha Carter determined the cause was the damage the Unmanned Aerial Vehicle did to the Moodshroom. 

When Charlie was sent to Stargate Command by the Central Authority of the Reetou, she performed a complete exam and found that his body was failing from his rapid growth. Since she was unable to help him, he was taken with Jacob Carter and the Tok'ra. 

When the other members of SG-1 were captured by Hathor and Teal'c was found near death, she spent three weeks at his side until he regained consciousness. 

When Teal'c and Cronus were attacked by Nirrti, she was able to save Teal'c but Cronus was beyond her help. Major Samantha Carter was able to heal him with a Goa'uld healing device. 

200px
When Dr. Daniel Jackson was infected with Ma'chello's Goa'uld killing organisms, she called in Dr. James MacKenzie as she believed he was suffering from schizophrenia. They sent him to a mental facility. When the organism jumped to Teal'c and Daniel's condition improved, she and Major Samantha Carter began work on Ma'chello's Page turning devices. When they activated one, several organisms were released and entered her, Carter, and Colonel Jack O'Neill. Because Carter was a former host to Jolinar of Malkshur, the organism believed it had killed the symbiote and exited her body. She, with the help of Dr. William Warner, was able to guide Carter through the steps of removing the protein marker from her blood and making it safe to inject. Once she completed the process and injected the protein marker, the organisms were killed in her, O'Neill and Teal'c. 

When Merrin came to Stargate Command to trade Naquadah reactor technology, she performed a blood test and found nanites in her system. She then scanned her brain and found millions of nanites infesting her brain. Merrin explained that the Orbanians use nanites to acquire and share knowledge faster and they cannot harm others. 

When Dr. Samantha Carter and Major Charles Kawalsky arrived in our reality through the Quantum Mirror, she ran blood tests and determined they were who they said they were. 

A short time later, she patched Captain Kyle Rogers' staff weapon wound. 

When SG-1 visited the planet Vyus, they called in Fraiser to try to find a cure for their amnesia. She asked that some of the Vyans go with her to Stargate Command where she could use her more advanced medical equipment to determine the cause of the amnesia. Two Vyans, Orner, Mayris and Ke'ra traveled to the SGC. She found a substance that was blocking certain portions of their brains. With the help of Ke'ra, she was able to dissolve the substance and they regained their memories. 

During a Foothold situation at Stargate Command, the Stragoth used the Mimetic imaging device to impersonate her. 

2000

When SG-1 returned from P4X-884 with no memory of their mission, she discovered the device in their brains that was causing them to see Urgo. 

When many Edoran refugees came to Earth to escape the fire rain, she helped get the refugees situated. 

When Colonel Jack O'Neill stole a piece of Tollan technology, she performed a full physical at the request of Major General George S. Hammond. 

After SG-1 returned from P2X-416, she patched up Teal'c and Nyan. 

When Chulak was attacked by Apophis, Bra'tac and Moac fled to Stargate Command. She performed surgery on an injured Moac but was unable to save him. 

At some point after Samantha Carter was promoted to Major, Fraiser was also promoted. The first time she appeared as a major was when she treated SG-1 after they were exposed to radiation on P7X-377. 

When Dr. Daniel Jackson got appendicitis, she removed his appendix and helped him recover. She then traveled to the Naval base where the Blackbird was docked. She removed a Replicator block from Teal'c's back after their first attempt to destroy the Replicators. 

Janet Fraiser in her working clothes.
When Anise came to Stargate Command to use SG-1 to test the Atanik armbands, she was distrustful of Anise. When it appeared the armbands were affecting their health, she advised Major General George S. Hammond to have the armbands removed but they were unable. When SG-1 defied orders and went through the Stargate to destroy Apophis' Battleship, she detected the antivirus in their blood. 

When Shan'auc came to Stargate Command with her symbiote nearing maturity, Dr. Fraiser did all she could to keep Shan'uac alive but without a new symbiote there was nothing she could do. Luckily the Tok'ra were able to assist. 

When Major Samantha Carter was turned into a Za'tarc, Dr. Fraiser attempted to sedate Major Carter so she would not harm herself or others. After administering the sedative, Carter realized why the Za'tarc detector believed herself and Colonel Jack O'Neill were Za'tarcs and had Anise retest them both. 

When Colonel Jack O'Neill and Teal'c said they were experiencing the same day over and over, they were sent to be checked out by Fraiser. This happened so many times that O'Neill could not remember how many times they had repeated the day. 

After SG-2 returned to Stargate Command from a search of the glaciers on P3R-118, she found that Major Michael Griff had minor frostbite. 

She had the drugs in Martin Lloyd's house tested and found several unidentified chemicals present. 

She helped Major Samantha Carter perform tests on the Isis jar and then did an autopsy on Isis's dead symbiote. She later accompanied Carter and Dr. Daniel Jackson to Egypt to try and stop Osiris. When they arrived they found Dr. Steven Rayner badly beaten, she was able to treat him but Osiris escaped in his ship. 

2001

She tested Shifu's blood and found nanites like the ones found on the planet Argos. When Shifu put Dr. Daniel Jackson into a dream state to teach him, she could not wake him or determine what was happening. He later awakened on his own. 

When SG-5 and Dr. Daniel Jackson became depressed and suicidal, she determined their neural activity was too low. It was later determined that the Light Matrix Hologram in the Goa'uld Pleasure Palace on P4X-347 was the cause. 

When an Entity from P9C-372 entered the Stargate Command mainframe, she treated Major Samantha Carter and MSgt. Walter Harriman for electrical burns. When the Entity possessed Carter, she monitored her vital signs and when the Entity left her body and appeared Carter was dead, she was about to pull the plug when it was discovered Carter's consciousness had been downloaded into the computer. 

When Teal'c was captured and brainwashed by Apophis, Bra'tac performed the Rite of M'al Sharran. She disagreed with this and threatened to resign if Teal'c was allowed to die. Fortunately, Teal'c was able to beat his brainwashing and his symbiote was returned to him. 

After Orlin attempted to connect with Major Samantha Carter and rendered her unconscious. She examined her and believed it was due to exhaustion. 

When SG-1 returned from P7S-441 and believed they had been assigned a fifth member named Lt. Tyler, she found nothing to explain why they believed what they did. Later when examining their uniforms, she came in contact with the Reol chemical and saw a vision of Tyler. She performed an MRI on herself and found the residue in her brain and determined the chemical caused the delusion. 

200px
When Cassandra Fraiser began to suffer from a retrovirus that altered her DNA, she was unable to reverse the effects. SG-1 traveled to Hanka to investigate and were followed back to Stargate Command by Nirrti. She attempted to take Cassandra's blood and was captured. A desperate Fraiser held Nirrti at gunpoint, demanding that the former System Lord heal her. When Major General George S. Hammond offered to allow Nirrti to leave, Nirrti refused demanding a sample of Cassandra's blood, only to be reminded by Hammond that Fraiser was Cassandra's foster mother. Nirrti healed Cassandra and was released. 

She again tested Martin Lloyd's medication and discovered it contained the same chemical that caused him to lose his memories a year earlier. 

2002

When Anubis tried to destroy Earth with a Naquadah asteroid, she evacuated to the Alpha Site. 

When SG-1 discovered the android Reese, she determined that she was made of millions of nanites. 

When Dr. Daniel Jackson was exposed to Naquadria radiation poisoning, she did what she could to make him comfortable but there was nothing she could do. Jacob Carter came to Stargate Command to attempt to heal him with the Goa'uld healing device but was told to stop by Daniel and he ascended. 

200px
When a team of scientists in Antarctica discovered an Ancient women named Ayiana in the ice near the second Stargate, she and SG-1 traveled to the Antarctica base. They thawed the remains and were shocked when they realized she was still alive. A short time later, Dr. Francine Michaels became ill with an Ancient contagion. As the other members of the base started to suffer symptoms including herself, Ayiana used her healing power to heal everyone but Colonel Jack O'Neill as she began to suffer the effects of the disease herself. When the containment team arrived, they quarantined O'Neill and Ayiana and took them to Stargate Command. She was unable to treat either of them and Ayiana died. O'Neill was able to be saved by the Tok'ra. 

When Colonel Jack O'Neill escaped Ba'al's outpost, she treated him for addiction to the Sarcophagus. 

After Dr. Kieran suffered a bad fall on Langara, he was sent to Stargate Command for treatment. She discovered that he suffered from schizophrenia from his exposure to Naquadria. 

When Anubis attacked the Tok'ra base in the Risa system and they evacuated to the Alpha Site, she assisted the wounded. After Ocker and Artok were murdered she performed the autopsies. 

When SG-1 traveled to Pangar and obtained a sample of Tretonin, she tested the sample and found that it harms the user's natural immune system. 

2003

When Jonas Quinn started seeing the Interdimensional creatures, she performed a physical and determined he had no brain damage from his exposure to Naquadria. 

She found that the body that was supposed to be Dr. Brent Langham was not him and helped track him down by tracing the medication for his epilepsy. 

When the Russian SG-4 came through Stargate with Alebran, she was unable to stop the genetic manipulation that was killing him. 

When Teal'c and Bra'tac were injured in the Ambush of Kresh'ta and they were forced to share Teal'cs symbiote, she was unable to keep Junior alive. Fortunately, Jacob Carter came to Stargate Command and offered them Tretonin. 

When Jonas Quinn developed precognition from his time in Nirrti's DNA resequencer, she performed an MRI and discovered a tumor. She then assisted Dr. Sandy Van Densen in its removal. 

When SG-1 found Dr. Daniel Jackson on Vis Uban with no memory of who he was, she performed a full physical on him and determined he was the real Daniel and was in perfect health except for his eyesight and gave him his glasses. 

When Colonel Jack O'Neill was abducted by the Asgard Loki and replaced by a Duplicate that was much younger in age, she performed a DNA analysis and found it a 99% match. Upon further testing, she discovered his body was deteriorating and he would die in a few weeks. With the help of Jacob Carter/Selmak, she was able to determine he was a clone. 

When Teal'c was hit in the Symbiote pouch by a Staff weapon blast, she performed surgery to repair the damaged spine and surrounding tissue. Over the next few weeks, she supervised his physical therapy. 

When Dr. Daniel Jackson had several Talthun consciousnesses downloaded into his mind, she attempted to communicate with the with different people. She was frustrated by the Sovereign Martice and commented that he was as arrogant as a Goa'uld. When Tryan emerged, she was able to get him to explain the situation and he was certain his body was dead. The consciousnesses were purged from Daniel and transferred into Pharrin. 

She administered Tretonin to several of the Hak'tyl Resistance including Mala. When Mala began to die, she replaced her symbiote but it was too late and she died. 

The Memorial Service of Fraiser.
She was interviewed by Emmett Bregman for his Stargate documentary. After the interview, he asked her to lunch and was clearly flirting with her. The lunch was cut short by a medical emergency. She traveled to P3X-666 with SG-1 and attempted to stabilize Senior Airman Simon Wells during the battle that raged. In the process of treating him, she was hit by an errant staff weapon blast and killed instantly; her final words were, "You hang in there airman." 

Legacy

Fraiser's sacrifice was not in vain as her treatment saved Wells' life. At the memorial service, Major Samantha Carter listed the many lives saved by Fraiser including the whole SG-1 team, Wells, Major Ian Hules and Sgt. Connie Smith. 

After the success of the Jaffa rebellion, Teal'c stated that he had personally become uncomfortable using a staff weapon since Janet had been killed by such a weapon. He declared that, in her memory, he would only use a staff weapon if it was completely unavoidable. 

Alternate realities

*In an alternate reality visited by Daniel Jackson in 1998, Janet Fraiser did not appear to be a member of the SGA as she was not present when Daniel was subjected to an MRI scan to determine if he was a Goa'uld. Daniel specifically inquired as to where she was but did not receive an answer. 

*In another alternate reality, Janet Fraiser seemingly served as the chief medical officer of the SGA as the Doctor Samantha Carter of her reality referred to her counterpart in our reality as "your Dr. Fraiser" when speaking with Jack. Her fate is unknown, though it is likely that she was killed in the Goa'uld invasion of Cheyenne Mountain in 1999. 

 
Fraiser hugs Carter.
* In another alternate reality, Janet Fraiser was not killed on P3X-666 while treating Senior Airman Simon Wells in 2003. After helping her to stabilize Simon, Dr. Daniel Jackson managed to get her out of the path of the staff weapon blast. In 2006, her world was in the process of being attacked by the Prior virus. She accompanied SG-1 - which consisted of Daniel, Lt. Colonel Cameron Mitchell, and Martouf - on their search for a cure since that reality's Lt. Colonel Samantha Carter was on maternity leave at the time. During the search, she and her SG-1 were accidentally sent to our reality. Like her counterpart in our reality, she was a medical doctor. Major General Henry Landry gave them the cure before returning them to their reality. In her reality, Brigadier General Jack O'Neill was still the commanding officer of Stargate Command. 

Alternate timelines

 
*In an alternate timeline created when SG-1 were sent almost a century into the future, Janet was the last member of the SGC to evacuate Earth when it fell to a Goa'uld invasion after Earth's allies withdrew their support, intending to remain with General Hammond until he revealed that Cassie had already been evacuated. She served as an opposing figure to the NID's control of the new colony due to her strong ties to SG-1, managing to arrange various short missions back to Earth to offer medical support. She was eventually taken as a host by the Goa'uld Hecate, who served as a leader against the Wraith, and would eventually acquire the service of Rya'c as her First Prime. After SG-1's attempts to change history merely created an alternate timeline, they established that Hecate had been responsible for sending them into the future in the first place, as her Jaffa had rigged the Stargate so that the subsequent wormhole would trap SG-1 in the elliptical orbit of a black hole. During the battle for control of Hecate's Ha'tak, the Goa'uld-Wraith Hybrid Sobek betrayed Hecate and fatally injured Janet's body. Hecate fled Janet, but was crushed by Sobek. The dying Janet was recovered by Carter who was surprised that even after nearly a century as a host, Janet's mind still existed within her body. Janet regained consciousness long enough to tell her old friend she always knew SG-1 would one day return and with a single gesture, offer admonishment, forgiveness and friendship. Janet's last act before dying was to warn Carter of Sobek's coming attack. Carter returned Janet's body to Earth on an Al'kesh and Janet's body was buried on her reclaimed home planet. 

 
Janet in 2010 in an alternate timeline
*In an alternate timeline, Janet Fraiser gave Samantha Carter a check up when she was having difficulty conceiving a child. Janet discovered Samantha was unable to have children even though Aschen doctors said she was fine. When they investigated further, they found that almost all of the Earth's population had been sterilized. They informed Daniel Jackson, Teal'c, and Jack O'Neill and together formed a plan to prevent this from ever happening. When the plan was put in motion, Janet traveled to Chulak to let Teal'c know. 

Personality

 

Powers and abilities

Abilities

*Gifted Intellect
*Master Physician

Equipment

 

Weapons

*Colt M16A3 rifle
*H&K MP5A3 submachine gun
*M9 pistol

Wardrobe

*Battle Dress Uniform
*Desert Camouflage Uniform
*Service Dress Uniform
*Tactical vest
*Hazmat suit

Relationships

Family

*Cassandra Fraiser

Romances

*Janet Fraiser's husband

Friendships

*Samantha Carter

*Daniel Jackson

*Jack O'Neill

*Teal'c

*George S. Hammond