The Nox are a humanoid race from the lush planet Gaia, located in the Milky Way galaxy. The Nox had a symbiotic relations with nature, and as a society were centered on absolute pacifism and non-violence. They also did not permit their technological advances to compromise the natural beauty of their environment.

Background

The Nox are peaceful and fairy-like people, capable of reviving the dead and rendering objects as large as their own city invisible. 

History

 
The Nox are considered to be a member of the "Alliance of Four Great Races", along with the Ancients, Asgard, and Furlings. 

The Nox' symbol.
They encountered SG-1 on their homeworld when the Goa'uld System Lord Apophis came hunting for the Fenri. 

When SG-1 wanted to help the Tollans escape Earth and the NID, they suggested that the Nox could take them. The Nox later helped the refugees leave Earth and build a Stargate on their new home world of Tollana. In addition, Lya acted as the neutral Archon in the Triad of Skaara and Klorel. When Teal'c became suspicious of the Goa'uld's intentions during the Triad, he approached Lya for help and they reached a compromise: Lya refused to directly help against the Goa'uld but would hide one of the Tollan's ion cannons in case it was necessary. It turned out to be a necessary precaution as the Goa'uld did attack, but Lya walked a fine line in doing so: she didn't break the Nox pacifism as she only hid the cannon, not fired it. 

The Nox were one of the races who had technology stolen from them by the Rogue NID and who threatened to break off their alliance with Earth were the culprits not stopped and exposed. 

Physiology

 
The Nox are known to be one of the oldest species that inhabit the galaxy, although very few know of them. Like the Ancients, they were humans more or less, but with a faint gray skin color as well as grass-like hair from which branches and leaves grow. The Nox tend to wear primitive clothing with colors that combine gray to gray-blue to violet and scarlet. They appear slightly shorter than average humans with a slight build; they often present an unassuming façade that belies their capabilities.

Because of their more advanced physiology and symbiotic relations with nature, the eldest of the Nox can reach the age of 500 years, with children reaching maturity by the age of 18 years. Once a Nox reaches adulthood, their aging slows down to an almost imperceptible rate. Only during the last two centuries of a Nox's life do they begin to appear old, but this also belies their true age.

Evolved abilities

*Heightened intellect: The Nox are an extremely intelligent and perceptive race that are able to perform complex arithmetic in fractions of a second.
*Eidetic memory: They possess an astounding ability to comprehend and retain information with near perfect memories.
*Heightened perception: They make use of the five senses that Humans use but they are far more acute when compared to Humans allowing them to pick up on details and subtleties around them that others would miss entirely. This provides the Nox with abilities that border on extra-sensory perception due to their perceptive nature and heightened senses.
*Bio-electrical tuning: In addition to this, the Nox possess the innate ability to tune into the bio-electrical fields within other beings, in a sense "reading" them at a level far beyond normal senses. They are capable of also channeling their natural heightened perception into a number of extraordinary abilities that include the ability to learn languages after hearing them spoken for only a short time, a mild form of mind-reading that allows them to detect nearby surface thoughts, and the ability to heal others. With the latter ability, which they refer to as the Ritual of Life, the Nox are capable of completely healing the most severe of injuries and even resurrect the recently deceased so long as the tiniest amount of molecular activity as well as bio-electrical energy remains within the body. In order to accomplish this ritual, there is a minimum requirement of three Nox to perform the intense and focused concentration which interrupts their ability to use their technology. They also can render extremely large objects invisible and insubstantial. It is unlikely, however, that a feature such as their city is cloaked in this manner. It most likely uses its own cloaking device. 

Culture

Nox writing.
The race has a symbiotic relationship with nature and, in particular, the forests of the world as well as the living beings that occupy it be they animal or plant. In the view of the Nox, all beings contribute to and receive from the universe. This view prevented the Nox from allowing their technological advances to compromise the natural beauty of their environment of their world. Nox scholars long ago discovered that "life", the energy that keeps all beings alive, is in essence a dynamic energy myriad of other energy fields that exist outside the physical form. The Nox believe these external energy fields comprise the "life force" of their planet and the universe itself. In their view, these individual fields, also known as "consciousness" to the people of Earth, exists with an external field with each working with the other one. The Nox appear to be less arrogant than most technologically advanced races, as they only kindly refer to the humans as "young", instead of referring to them flatly as "primitive", like most of the other races do.
The Nox (at least the ones who live in the forest) are vegetarians: they usually eat fruit, porridge and different plants. They don't eat meat: the Nox believe that every animal, every being is sacred and has rights to live. It's likely that the Nox get protein, carbohydrates and other important elements from their white porridge and different special plants.

Society

 
The Nox practice a philosophy of absolute pacifism and non-violence that is so strict that they refuse even to defend themselves when threatened. Should a Nox find themselves in such a situation, they tend to typically hide through the use of their stealth technology or simply use their technology to remove the aggressors along with their weapons. This policy is so strict that others within their domain are forced to obey their rules of policy of pacifism when necessary. Should visitors attempt to employ violence against one another, the Nox remove their weapons as part of their rules.

The Ritual of Life being used to resurrect Lya.
The Nox race highly values freedom; both for themselves and for others. They refuse to infringe on the rights of others for free choice except where such individuals choose to make use of violence or war-like ways. As such, the Nox accept no authority except their own and thus refuse to allow others to impose their views on others.

Isolationist and non-interventionist in the extreme, they feel morally obligated to help both sides of an argument, no matter if one side is thoroughly evil. Case in point, they will equally aid both the Goa'uld and the Tau'ri (Earth Humans). They will not even fight to protect themselves; however, with their abilities of rendering objects invisible and resurrecting their dead, fighting is unnecessary.

When Tollana comes under attack, it is saved because Teal'c and Lya hid an Ion cannon with Lya's abilities. When asked about this, as it should go against the Nox's rules against violence, Lya says that it was alright as she simply "hid" the weapon, not "fired" it, although she admitted that when she did she walked a very fine line. 

The Nox practice a philosophy of absolute pacifism and non-violence so strict that they refuse even to defend themselves when threatened. When placed in such situations, the Nox typically hide using their stealth technologies. or to use their abilities to remove the aggressors and their weapons. The Nox enforce this devote pacifism and nonviolence o n others when necessary as well, such as when SG-1 confronted Apophis and his Jaffa during their mission on the Nox's world. In these situations, the Nox refuse to allow visitors to employ violence against one another, and usually take the visitors' weapons from them as well. The Nox value freedom, both for themselves and for others, and refuse to impinge on another's right to free choice, save when others choose violent or war-like ways. The Nox respect no authority on their world beyond themselves, and refuse to allow one party to impose their wishes onto another. For example, the Nox refused to hand Shak'l over to SG-1, as doing so would have meant denying ShakT his freedom of choice. The Nox live in two distinct types of communities: massive floating cities above the six major continents of the planet, and in small forest villages scattered across the surface. Permanent residents of the floating cities are referred to as City Dwellers, and include Nox leaders as well as most scientists and scholars. In contrast to the primeval forests, Nox cities feature advanced architecture and metal and plastic construction. Copious trees, vines, and other plants adorn nearly all their buildings, forming a sort of "forest apron" which helps the Nox residents remain within close proximity nature at all times. While on the surface, the Nox live in tiny settlements of thatched huts, most comprising only a single family. Thousands of these settlements cover the forests, most within a day's walk from each other. All property is communal among the Nox, and it's not uncommon for the same family to live in a different settlement every time they return to the forests. Nox refer to those fortunate few who permanently reside on the surface as Forest Dwellers. They are mostly older Nox who prefer to remain within the forest for the final years of their lives. The Nox government is a meritocracy; comprising a council of five elders selected their peers. Each member carries out a term of two to five years, with a new member selected every five years. For a race as long-lived as the Nox, this means an almost constantly changing ruling council, leaving very little time for political maneuvering (which while mostly absent, still occurs from time to time).

GAIA, THE NOX HOME WORLD

The Nox world is a large planet with six large conti nents separated by three oceans. Small polar ice caps comprise roughly 20% of the planet, with the rest of the surface covered equally by land and water. The terrain of the planet is mostly forests and mountains, with patches of grass- lands and rolling hills between the larger forests. The Nox refer t o their world a s Gaia, and like the Earth hypothesis of the same name, refers to their belief that their world, like all planets in the galaxy, is in reality a living organism. Though obviously populated, the Goa'uld and many other star-faring races believe the Nox world to be unpopulated. The Nox find this misunderstanding beneficial. remaining for the most part isolated from the rest of the galaxy for the last several thousand years. Still, travelers from other worlds do occasionally arrive through the Stargate, whom the Nox maintain a careful watch over for the duration of their stay. The forest settlement nearest to the Stargate (within an hour's walk) serves as a guard post of sorts, and the family residing there acts as guardians. monitoring the Stargate for unwelcome guests. The Stargate is outfitted with sensors that automatically alert the guardians when visitors arrive. The guardians then cloak and/or shift the nearby floating city and any nearby creatures t o maintain the illusion that their world is uninhabited. The guardians also observe the visitors closely. ensuring they don't threaten or harm the Nox or any of the living beings on their world. In addition to the Stargate guardians, the Nox also use powerful sensors to monitor space around their world to alert them o f any incoming spacecraft.

THE NOX AND OTHER SPECIES

Though largely unknown to other races, the Nox do interact with certain species from time to time, both o n their home world and on other planets as well. The Nox view themselves a s "teachers" and believe it is their roles to instruct the "Young," whether they b e young Nox o r young species such as humans. Though they limit their contact with other species, the Nox try to take advantage of any and all opportunities to teach others their ways.

THE FENRI HUNTERS

The most common visitors t o Gaia are parties coming to their world t o hunt the Fenri, a large flying creature native to the Nox world. The Nox use their stealth technologies to protect and defend the Fenri. Over the centuries, tales o f the invisible creature resulted in false legends of " a flying beast with powers of invisibility on an uninhabited world." Over the past several hundred years countless hunters have arrived i n search o f the mythic creature, all of whom met with failure. This legend also led both SG-1 and Apophis to the Gaia, and in turn exposed the Nox's existence t o the Goa'uld.

THE NOX AND GOA'ULD

Until recently the Nox remained unknown to the Goa'uld, despite their participation in the Heliopolis alliance with the Asgard. Apophis recent visit to Gaia ended their isolation, and made the System Lords aware o f their extraordinary powers. At SG-1s suggestion, the Nox buried their Stargate in hopes o f preventing the Apophis from returning. Apophis responded by charging his son Klorel with the task of returning to the Nox world t o locate, capture, or (if all else failed) destroy the primitive people who so easily bested him. Arriving in a hatak warship. Klorel and his Jaffa spent days searching the planet for any signs of the Nox, only t o leave disappointed. Apophis hasn't given up on finding and dominating the Nox, but other more pressing matters keep him from returning. Since his initial visits, word as spread among the other System Lords o f a people with fantastic abilities, and several Goa uld have since visited Gaia, only t o leave empty handed.

THE NOX AND THE TOLLAN

A few months after SG-1's visit to their world, the Nox unburied their Stargate to aid a race of technologically advanced beings known as the Tollan ( a small group of whom were saved by SG-1 before their former world destroyed itself). Stranded on Earth and unable t o travel t o their new home via Stargate, this small group was set to b e imprisoned by the NID when Daniel Jackson convinced Omoc, the leader of the Tollan to use their advanced technology to contact the Nox. The Nox responded quickly, traveling to Earth and offering the Tollan refuge o n their world. Once o n Gaia, the Tollan contacted their fellows and were picked up by a Tollan starship shortly thereafter (see Enigma, page 6 2 for more information).

Nox EXpLORERS AND THE SGC If you were to ask Daniel Jackson or anyone in the SGC if they keep in contact with the Nox, their answer would likely be "No." What the SGC doesn't realize is that Nox have encountered S G teams on several occasions since SG-1's visit to their world, but avoid making direct contact, preferring to observe the humans and their actions. Some of these travelers have considered making contact with the humans so that they might interact with them in a less covert manner, but none have yet done so. That may change in the future, however, especially if the S C team in question displays the sort of compassion and value for life which the Nox themselves so purely embody.

Technology

 
The Nox's advanced technology is shown when they revealed their floating city to the SG-1 team on the Nox's planet. This is presumably achieved by their anti gravity technological capabilities. They are also capable of establishing a wormhole instantly (without needing to dial) without the unstable vortex effect and disable Stargate Command's Iris while traveling to Earth, both capabilities shared with the Asgard. They rarely use their technology, however, preferring to live in a simpler state with nature. Both their cloaking technology, and the disabling of the unstable vortex are technologies that other members of the Alliance of Four Great Races possess, possibly meaning that they traded it with each other. . 
Also, possibly, some of their abilities (such ability as rendering objects) actually can be created by technology, although this has not been seen before.

From the Stargate SG-1 RPG Alderac Entertainment Group version (editor does not know if it is still canon, so disregard and delete if not.):

Though you'd never know to look at them, the Nox are a highly technological species, possessing technology that rivals that o f the Asgard, possibly even the Ancients. The Nox have not allowed the advance o f technology to compromise their world's ecosystem, or to change the fundamental values o f their society, limiting the outward signs o f their advancement. Where the advance of their civilization or technology might encroach on the wilderness, the Nox instead pursued alternative solutions, such a s relocating their industries into the floating cities, leaving the surface pristine. Similarly, while their technology could produce devastating weapons, the Nox remain completely steadfast in their adherence to absolute pacifism. fields of different sorts, including light, gravity, and electromagnetic energy. This is an extension of their natural ability t o interact with and manipulate the bio-electrical energy fields of living beings. Their natural abilities are limited t o individual energy fields, but through technology, they are able to interact with and manipulate external energy fields, granting them astounding capabilities. Most prominent among the Nox's technological achievements is their ability t o make themselves and others invisible and intangible. This ability is in fact two distinct effects, known t o Nox scientists as cloaking and shifting, and these two effects are the basis for many of the Nox's technological capabilities. Cloaking creates a n energy field around the subject that is undetectable b y Earth sciences and which causes light that would otherwise reflect off a subject to bend around the subject, creating an effect equivalent t o invisibility. The Nox use this effect to defend themselves when necessary, but they also use it t o defend the creatures o f their world from off-world hunters, such as the Fenri, who the Nox have cloaked from Goa'uld hunters for centuries. Shifting transfers a subject from the dimension of normal space to that of a parallel dimension know to Earth scientists a s sub-space b y manipulating the energy fields that define the boundary between normal and sub-spaces. This has the effect of making the subject effectively disappear from normal space. The Nox can shift themselves. as well a s inanimate objects, and other beings into and out of sub-space at will. Most non-Nox retain no memory of entering sub-space when shifted, nor do they recall anything of the time spent in sub-space. Objects and beings shifted into sub-space can be shifted back into normal space at any location the Nox performing the shifting can see, allowing the Nox to seemingly teleport across great distances. The Nox often shift themselves when visitors arrive on their world, that they may observe the visitors. and also occasionally use this ability to defend themselves and the creatures o f their world from outside threats, similar t o the way they employ cloaking. Beings and objects in sub-space cannot normally interact with those in normal space in any way. The only exception are shifted Stargates. which can connect to other Stargates within normal space. Beyond cloaking and shifting, the Nox technology also provides them the ability to interact with and control other technological devices, including those of non-Nox design. This control comes from manipulating the physical, electrical (or nuclear, or quantum) energy used by the device. This capability has virtually no limit, and can control devices as simple a s a bicycle or as complex a s the Stargate. This latter use is one o f the more common, though specialized, uses of this ability, allowing the Nox to open the Stargate without need of using a dialing device. One other capability granted the Nox by their technology is that of anti-gravity, accomplished by counteracting the natural forces of gravity in a localized area. Unlike other Nox technological capabilities, anti-gravity is not used by individual Nox on an as needed basis, but is instead permanently applied to a specific object, such as the floating cities o n which much of the Nox population live. The mechanism by which the Nox employ their technology is unlike that of most other species. Whereas most species employ devices of one sort of another, the Nox do not carry gear or equipment of any kind. Instead, the technology they employ lives within their bodies, and is as much as part of them as individual Nox are part of the world around them. The components of Nox technology are microscopic organisms that, when living within Nox physiology strengthen the natural bio-electric energy field in their bodies and grant them the ability to manipulate the external energy fields around them to create the technological effects of cloaking, shifting, and controlling technology. Nox scientists bred these organisms, using cells from the Nox and many of the plants and trees on Gaia, and they are attuned specifically to Nox physiology. They offer no benefit to other species. Activating most capabilities requires no more than thought on the part of the Nox, though controlling technology often requires gestures. The Nox implant their children with these organisms a t the age o f 5 o r 6. The Nox learn t o control and master the abilities of their technology over time, beginning with the ability to cloak themselves and gradually adding more and more abilities until they've mastered all that their technology offers. Mechanics: In game terms, most of the capabilities offered by Nox technology, including cloaking, shifting, and controlling technology are accessible by acquiring specific feats, which are detailed i n the appropriate section on page 137. CLOAKING AND SHIFTING CHARACTERS Cloaking and shifting convey no adverse affects on subjects, apart from mild disorientation upon being shifted back into normal space after more than a few moments in sub-space (-1 to all rolls on the round following their return to normal space). In this case, non-Nox characters feel as though they have lost track of time,(which is in fact, exactly what happens) and have no memory whatsoever of their time in sub-space. Individual feat descriptions include specific game effects of being cloaked and/or shifted.

Known Nox

*Anteaus
*Lya
*Nafrayu
*Ohper
*Druana