Tollan, designated P3X-7763 by the Tau'ri, was the homeworld of the Tollan. When their planet began to go through a great cataclysm, the Tollan abandoned the planet by ship. Omoc and a team remained behind to bury the Stargate, but they began to succumb to the toxic gases released by the volcanoes. SG-1 found them like that, and took them back to Earth. 

History

Settlement

Though it was thought that the Tollan were brought to Tollan by use of the Stargate, and indeed some believed it was by the Ancients themselves, this was not in fact the case. The truth was lost to even their own histories, and so even the Tollan themselves did not know they were originally the Mayans of Earth. They were transported to Tollan through the crystal skull network by the Omeyocans, as their territory on Earth was being invaded by the Goa'uld-controlled Aztecs. Settling on the planet, the Tollan soon forgot about their Omeyocan saviors and the crystal skulls themselves. 

The planet was rich in natural resources, and so Tollan civilization flourished at an unprecedented rate. Discovering that their new planet was very much like Earth, with large continents that were teeming with life and vast oceans of water which gave them a carefully-balanced ecosystem, the Tollan soon spread across the planet and it became their new home. On the easternmost continent they discovered the planet's only known, and quite vast, desert just below the equatorial range. Despite this pleasant climate, the planet experienced the occasional bouts of earthquake activity and volcanic blasts. As the Tollan grew in their technological prowess, they learned to partially control their planets climate in order to help mitigate these problems.

Industrial age

The Stargate on Tollan during the planets destruction.
It was these very technological advances, as well as overpopulation, that would eventually prove to be the downfall of the planet. Untempered by forethought or planning, they soon ate up their planet's natural resources and entered into a great industrial age. Because of their technological advancements during this time, the Tollan became secure in their superiority and arrogance. By the time that they realized their mistakes it was too late to save their planet at their level of technology. Having wiped out several species of animals, as well as polluting their air to the level of toxicity, the Tollan began to work on clean energy sources. Though they managed to make some progress in this regard during their last centuries on the planet, it would have taken thousands of years to fix the damage they had brought upon themselves.

Because of this, and their growing population, the Tollan began to develop space travel, planning to one day colonize other planets to save their race. They were pleasantly surprised, however, when they discovered one such planet in their own solar system; Sarita. This planet was populated by a less advanced alien society of its own, and so the Tollan offered their own technology so that they could create clean energy through energy generation and fusion. The Saritans wasted this knowledge and, instead of using it to save their planet from the same fate as Tollan, used it to wage war. The resulting destruction of Satira caused the orbital alignment of Tollan to shift, plunging it into further chaos and ruining any chances the Tollan had of saving it.

The landscape on Tollan after the disaster.
This shift drastically altered the planet's day and night cycle, leaving a large portion of the planet in eternal darkness, and also caused large fluctuations in the planets magnetic field. Because of these fluctuations, the tidal cycle of the oceans was altered causing heavy damage to the atmosphere itself, and earthquakes became nearly constant all over the planet. Soon, black clouds of ash and smoke filled the sky, plunging the entire planet into eternal darkness. The fallout from these clouds poisoned the water, causing it to become acidic and killing the remaining life on the planet. In order to never forget what sharing their technology could do, the Tollan named this the time of Rememberance. 

Downfall

Having no way to save their planet, the Tollan once more reached to the stars, sending their entire population to another planet&mdash;Tollana&mdash;which was rich with trinium and had a stable ecosystem. Several members of the population chose to stay behind on the planet in order to bury their Stargate so that no others would be trapped on the planet after they left. It was at this time that the Tau'ri visited the planet from Earth, once again uniting themselves with their brethren. As soon as SG-1 stepped through the Stargate, they noticed their surroundings and chose to leave immediately. This would have meant doom for the remaining Tollan if not for Dr. Daniel Jackson, who noticed the bodies of several Tollan on the ground.

A volcano on Tollan.
SG-1 immediately set about scouring the local area for any more survivors, finding Omoc and Narim among others. Although many of the Tollan were unconscious, Omoc managed to grab Captain Samantha Carter's arm, demanding that they be left on the planet and not saved as he believed that there was a spaceship coming to get them. Whether or not this was true is unknown, as Samantha chose to ignore the demand, taking the Tollan back to Earth so that they may live. 

Having learned of these Tollan survivors, Colonel Harold Maybourne used the Beta Gate on Earth to send a group of N.I.D. agents through to Tollan straight away. Although the climate conditions were becoming increasingly worse, the N.I.D. agents managed to scout a small area around the Stargate. They were not able to salvage any kind of sizable equipment or weaponry, but did manage to recover the body of a single Tollan, as well as a number of smaller Tollan devices, which they took back to Earth. Although these devices turned out to be a phase device, inverted phase communicator, and recall device, the intense heat had fused the crystals inside them which made them unusable. The N.I.D. agents sent the devices to Area 51 to be studied regardless. 

Stargate Command attempted to dial Tollan once more only a few days after the Tollan managed to leave with the Nox, but were unable to get a lock. This was due to the fact that the Stargate had been swept away by the lava, covering it completely.